INTRODUCTION

It has happened more than once in the history of thought
that a really great and creative thinker has become the vic-
tim of a traditional interpretation, which soon became so
thoroughly established that no further thought was given
to his system. Instead of giving his thought the critical
examination which it really deserved, each generation of
thinkers and writers would simply pigeonhole it according
to the traditional interpretation. I am very sure that this
is just what has happened in the case of Wollaston. Even
British writers on the history of ethical philosophy have,
for the most part, said the traditional things about him,
and that without veriﬁcation as to the truth of the state-
ments made. This may be explained by the fact that his
book soon became rather rare. Very few British writers
give any evidence of having read Wollaston at all carefully
and those who did read his book seem to have stopped with
the ﬁrst two sections. We can be quite sure from internal
evidence that many of his critics knew him only through sec-
ondary sources. Some attribute illustrations and even quo-
tations to him that cannot be found in his work. Perhaps
the most common of these ﬁctitious illustrations is the “one
regarding a man breaking his wife’s head, which is mentioned
as authentic by even as great an authority on the Eighteenth
Century as Leslie Stephen. “Thirty years’ profound medi-
tation had convinced Wollaston that the reason why a man
should abstain from breaking his wife’s head was, that it
was a way of denying that she was his wife.” 1 The same
can be said of the French as of the British writers in this
respect. Instead of criticising him on the basis of actual

‘ L. Stephen, English Thought in the 18th Century, p. 130.
3

 

4: Introduction

quotations and on the basis of Wollaston’s own illustrations,
they discuss him in a most general way, using illustrations
that are not his. On the whole the German historians of
philosophy understand him better and treat him more ex-
tensively and more fairly. This, though, does not mean
that they had read him more carefully, in fact one ﬁnds
more of this ﬁctitious material in the German works than in
the British and French. It means that they had more sym-
pathy with his rationalistic and idealistic philosophy and so
I they invented materials that more truly represented Wollas-
ton. The Germans gave considerable attention to Wollaston
because they regarded him as a precursor of Kant. So re-
garding him, however, and making interpretations of his
philosophy, without careful objective investigation, they
naturally miss his meaning in many cases. They try to
give Wollaston’s ethics an intuitionistic interpretation for
which there is no justiﬁcation. Garve and Drechsler are
responsible for this interpretation. The latter wrote a
book dealing with Wollaston’s philosophy exclusively; but
perhaps the former was even more responsible 'for this
interpretation becoming traditional, because he claims that
his interpretation of Wollaston is an actual quotation and
actually incloses his remarks in quotation marks. Later
German writers have based their interpretation on this pas-
sage. For example, Von Hartmann quotes the entire pas-
sage and says that it is Christian Garve’s translation of
Wollaston.2

Conybeare tells us what a great impression Wollaston’s
intellectual criterion of morals made upon the contempor-
aries of Wollaston who were interested in ﬁnding a ﬁrmer
foundation for morals than that offered by hedonism. Cony-
beare himself speaks of the theory as though it were a
discovery in morals, “ﬁt to be placed beside the discoveries
of Newton in astronomy.” 3 That his system enjoyed con-
siderable popularity when it was ﬁrst promulgated is proven
by the fact that his work, itself, went through seven editions

' Drechsler, Uber Will. Wollaston’s Moralphilosophie, Erlangen, 1801.
Garve, Ubersicht der vornehmsten Principien der Sittenlehre, p. 172.

' Conybeare, Defence of Revealed Religion, p. 239.

 

Introduction . 

in ten years, and also by the number of books and pamphlets
which it evoked. His popularity, however, must have been
exceedingly ephemeral for his work soon became very rare.
Because of the fantastic interpretations given to his system
of ethics it was soon relegated to the curiosity section of the
philosophical museum.

 

 

CONTENTS

Introduction . .

Wollaston’s Dedication . . . . . . . . . .
The Relation of Wollaston to the Thought of His Age .
The Predecessors of Wollaston .

“The Religion of Nature Delineated” . .
Exposition "of the Section on the Nature of Goodness
Wollaston’s Critical Interpretation of Other Systems .
Wollaston Deals with Possible Objections to His Principle
General Interpretation of Section I .

I. Morality Treated as Analogous to Truth .

II. The Search for and Objective Standard of Moral-


Wollaston and His Critics

I. That He Confuses Logical and Moral Relations .

II. That Immorality as Well as Morality Conforms
toNature..........

III. That Wollaston Obscures the Real Nature of
Morality...........

IV. That the Nature of Virtue is Not Deﬁned but As-
sumed...........

V. That Wollaston’s System is Over-Intellectualistic
Critical Exposition of the Section on Happiness

I. Exposition of Section II “Of Happiness" .
7

PAC!

11

l 8
32
32
68
72
78

78

85
95
95

114

125

137
150

162
162

 

8 Contents

II. An Examination of the Hedonistic Interpretation
ofWollaston.........

III. An Examination of the Utilitarian Interpretation

of Wollaston

IV. An Examination of the Dualistic Interpretation of

Wollaston . . . . . .

V. The Ethics of Wollaston Reconciles Rationalism
andHedonism. . . . . . . . .

Practical Religion and Practical Morality . . . .
Section VI. “Truths Respecting Mankind in
General” . . . . . . . . . .

Section VII. “Truths Respecting Particular So-
cieties of Men and of Governments” .

Section VIII.
Relations”

Section IX. “Truths Respecting a Private Man”

“Truths Concerning Families and

The Metaphysical Teachings of Wollaston .
The Epistemology of Wollaston .

Section III. “Of Reasoning, and the Ways of
Discovering Truth” . . . . . .

The Problem of Freedom . . .

Section IV. “Of the Obligations of Imperfect Be-
ings with Respect to Their Power of Acting”

The Problems of Evil and Immortality .
Section V. “Truths Relating to the Deity” .

Index...........

 

PAGI

171
176
184

192
198

198
201

201
201
204
208

208

219

219
230
230
233

THE ETHICS OF
WILLIAM WOLLASTON

 

THE ETHICS OF .
WILLIAM WOLLASTON

WOLLASTON’S DEDICATION

Wollaston dedicates his book, “The Religion of Nature
Delineated,” to his friend, one A. F., Esq., because it seems
that this gentleman had asked him to state his thoughts
upon three questions, namely; .

I. Is there any such thing as natural religion properly
so called?

II. If there is, what is it?

III. How may a man qualify himself, so as to be able
to judge for himself, of the other religions profest in the
world; to settle his Own opinions in disputable matters; and
then to en oy tranquillity of mind, neither disturbing others,
nor being disturbed at what passes among men?

Wollaston’s work, “The Religion of Nature Delineated,”
is an answer to the ﬁrst two questions. We know that he
gave considerable thought to the third, but none of his
thoughts on that question were ever published. It would
not be difﬁcult to tell how he would answer it from the many
suggestions in his answers to the other two questions. Natu-
ral Religion, I am sure he would say, contains the great uni-
versals and essentials of all rellgion and all else in the
religions of the world is false.

Wollaston says that if he had anticipated that he was
to be called upon to write a book that he would have made
notes on his readings and would have recorded his thoughts

r 11

 

12 The Ethics of William Wollastan

through the years. Because he failed to do this he cannot,
he says, write a learned book; “but can only give some of”
his “thoughts upon the articles and duties of natural reli-
gion.” He makes almost no reference to modern moralists.
His illustrations are taken largely from the classics. He
claims originality for his ethical ideas.1

1 Wollaston, Religion of Nature Delineated, London, 1725.

 

THE RELATION 0F WOLLASTON TO THE
THOUGHT OF HIS AGE

In spite of the fact that Wollaston claims to be a phil-
osopher after the order of Melchisedeck: “That which is
advanced in the following papers, concerning the nature of
moral good and evil, and is the prevailing thought that runs
through them all, I never met with anywhere,” I think that
it can be shown that his philosophy belongs indubitably to
the period in which he lived and that it is very deﬁnitely
related to the stream of world thought. Wollaston died in
1724, the year Kant was born, so his thought belongs to
the ﬁrst quarter of the 18th century. This period is gen-
erally known as the early Enlightenment. It has been char-
acterized as an age of reason. The breaking down of reli-
gious authority necessitated the rationalization of morality.
The practical difﬁculty which the moralists of the time
faced was how to maintain order in society without the sanc-
tions of traditional religion. Since theology refused to
rationalize religion, the moralists had to seek other grounds
on which to base morality. The old religion had taught that
the revealed will of God determined the good, and as long
as this religion of authority was generally accepted there
was no room for ethical-discussions. But with the rise of
the rationalistic attitude toward religion, ethical specula-
tion became necessary to the very salvation of morality.1

Wollaston calls his book “The Religion of Nature Deline-
ated.” He set out, as did the contemporary Deists, to prove
the essentials of religion to be true apart from revelation.
He would also, like them, limit the essential doctrines of
religion to those which can be shown to be rational. The
very questions he set out to answer deﬁnitely relate him
to Deism. Reason for him, as for the deists, is the ﬁnal

‘ Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, p. XXXI.
l3

 

14: The Ethics of William Wollaston

test of truth in religion as elsewhere. Wollaston was in
holy orders and perhaps belonged more to the Rationalistic
School of Theology than to Deism, but there was much in
common in the two movements. The rationalistic theology
accepted the deistic position that faith must be tested by
reason, that reason is the ultimate court of appeal. Essen-
tial Christianity, it said, is reasonable and its truths are
capable of rational proof. Deism made morality the essence
of Natural Religion. The deists taught that he who believes
God to exist must, in order to be true to reason, acknowledge
the obligations of morality and natural religion. The the-
ologians of the Rationalistic School, like the deists, laid
more stress on right living than on subscriptions to theologi-
cal creeds. Their religion was not only ethical, but'like the
deists they considered ethics to be the chief part of religion.
Wollaston was in entire agreement with this view of religion.
The ﬁrst article of faith in Wollaston’s religion is the belief
that the human reason is competent to discover and to de-
ﬁne religious truth without supernatural aid or divine reve—
lation. All religious truth is discernible by the unaided
powers of reason and that which cannot be so explained is
to be rejected.2

There were two schools of moralists in England in the
18th century,——the Intellectual School and the Sensational
School. These schools had a great deal in common. They
had the same attitude towards traditional theology, espe-
cially towards traditional theological ethics. Both schools
were rationalistic in the theological sense and both made
great use of the term “natural” as opposed to “inspira-
tional” religion and ethics. The schools were entirely agreed
that it is not the mere will of God which constitutes the
distinction between right and wrong, and that morality is
independent of revelation. Both schools used “conformity
to nature” as the formula of morality, but the only thing
in common in the use of it as the criterion of morality was
the attempt to work out an ethics that would be independent

=1. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Gen, chs. 2 and s. Selby-

Bigge, British Moralists, pp. XX—XXIV. Wollaston, Reli. of N at, pp.
7, 42 and 203. Hurst, His. of Rationalism.

 

Relation of Wollaston to the Thought of [His Age 15

of traditional theological ethics. Both schools taught that
virtue is natural.8 Selby-Bigge says that “according to na-
ture” is an article of faith with both schools. This is true,
but it is very evident that the two schools use “natural”
and “according to nature” in very different senses. When
the intellectualists say that virtue is natural they mean that
it conforms to the eternal nature of things, and also that
it considers the true nature of man and seeks to realize it.
For the other school “natural” means in conformity to
man’s sentiments and affections. In the one school moral
distinctions are matters of reason; in the other, a matter
of feeling. Selby-Bigge says that the two schools are
“primarily distinguished by their adoption of reason and
feeling respectively as the faculty which perceives moral
distinctions, a faculty declared in each case to be peculiar
and not identiﬁable with ordinary reason or ordinary
feeling.” 4

I do not agree at all that Selby-Bigge’s statement that I
have just quoted is applicable to Wollaston. Some of the
ihtellectualists did believe that the faculty which perceives
moral distinctions is a “peculiar” one “and not at all iden-
tiﬁable with ordinary reason.” These I would denominate
intuitionists. Wollaston did not believe that man possesses
a special moral faculty capable both of apprehending the
reason why actions ought to be performed, i. e., the prin-
ciple from which the rightness follows, and of causing the
performance of such actions. I think that I can prove that
Wollaston was not an intuitionist in ethics, nor an intu-
itionalist' in epistemology, but that his philosophy is a re-
conciliation of the empirical and rational elements both in
knowledge and in morals. We have considered pre-Kantian
rationalism identical with intuitionalism, and in general this
is true, for it is a philosophy which makes knowledge and
morals dependent upon a body of immediately given self-
evident and necessary ﬁrst truths. Kant’s epistemology
reconciled the a priori and the a posteriori factors in knowl-
edge. Thanks to the natural empiricism of the English

' L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., ch. 9.
‘ Selby-Riggs, British Moralists, Intro.

 

16 The Ethics of William Wollaston

mind and to the inﬂuence of Locke, Wollaston did not re-
quire a Hume to arouse him from dogmatic slumber. Wol-
laston went much further than Kant, for the latter remained
an intuitionist in morals, a position inconsistent with his
anti—intuitionalistic epistemological position, while the for-
mer tried to reconcile the a priori and the a posteriori fac-
tors in morals.

The term rationalism is used in three very different
senses. When theologians use the term they generally have
in mind the religious and ethical systems which base truth
on the reason rather than our revelation. Wollaston was a
rationalist in this sense of the word. A second use of the
term would identify rationalism with intuitionism and intu-
itionalism. The term, when given this connotation, cannot
apply to Wollaston, but moralists of the Sensational School
quite generally confuse rationalism and intuitionalism and
consequently criticize Wollaston for believing in innate ideas
of morality. The third view thinks of reason as a factor in
knowledge but that it is dependent upon experience for its
data. Wollaston was a rationalist in this sense, for he be-
lieves that knowledge is dependent upon the senses for data
and upon the reason for organization. Dewey classiﬁes the
uses of the term in these ways and then says: “The three
senses are historically connected. The 18th century ra—
tionalism in theology and in morals is derived from the in-
sistence of Descartes upon method, and clearness and dis-
tinctness as criteria of truth. It is combined, however, with
an empiricism which descends from Locke.” 5 It is cer-
tainly true that Wollaston combined the truth of rational-
ism with that of empiricism. His higher rationalism, un-
like intuitionalism, is not opposed to experience, but instead
is based on experience. It was a construction of experience
itself as a system of reason.6 I have no particular objection
to classing Wollaston with the “Philosophical Intuitionists”
as Sidgwick does, because his deﬁnition “Philosophical In-
tuitionism” is a clear statement of the a priori factor in the
determination of duty. Sidgwick says: “it is a view that

' Dewey, Art, Rationalism in Balwin Diet.
' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. D., pp. 49—6.

 

Relation of Wollaston to the Thought of His Age 17

seeks a complete synthesis of practical rules, and the prac-
tical is held tobe able to lay down one universal rule capable
of distinguishing good from evil.” 7 This “one universal
rule,” in Wollaston’s ethics, is that everything should .be
treated as that which it is. This is a universal and necessary
truth, but Wollaston does not think of it as an innate idea
or an intuition, but as a product of reﬂection.

I think that it can be said with truth that Wollaston
gave to the formula “according to nature” a more meta-
physical connotation than was generally given to it, and
that when he spoke of the “law of nature” he meant some-
thing quite different from the ordinary meaning. Locke
used “natural” in a somewhat similar way when he said that
morality is capable of being demonstrated as “natural.”
This meaning is that morality is as natural and as necessary
as a natural law. In no other sense could the law of nature
be the law of morality. The naturalness and necessity of
natural law is not what is meant by the naturalness and
necessity of morality. In a sense, though, it is the natural
law in the moral world and is based on the belief that the
world is all of a piece. The utilitarian interest was great in
Wollaston, due to the fact that he consciously tried to recon-
cile the opposing views of “naturalness,” by showing that
ultimately the two belong to the same all—comprehending
world of meaning. ‘ He may be fairly accused of confusing
the two meanings of “law of nature,” but he was seeking to
make it clear that morality is based on the real nature and
relations of things, and that happiness has the same foun-
dation. The free conformity of life to the nature of things
is goodness, and happiness is the, natural and necessary
consequence of such a life.8 _

'Sid ick, Method of Ethics, chi lntuitionism, I, 6, s and 13.

‘ Loc e, Essay on the Human Understanding, p. 28. Wollaston, Reli.
of Nat. D., pp. 87—8 and 41—2.

 

ﬁnial!- .31: AI- ; ‘ ;&.a;;;.';‘:‘

THE PREDECESSOR‘S OF WOLLASTON

Professor Sidgwick is right when he says that: “The
main stream of English ethics, so far as it ﬂows independ-
ently of Revelational Theology, begins with Hobbes and
the replies that Hobbes provoked.” He says that the start-
ing point of Hobbes’ ethical speculation is to be sought
mainly in the current view of the law of nature which was
deﬁned to mean the rules that men ought to observe, so far
as they can be known by the light of nature apart from
revelation. 1 Grotius had taken the position that this
natural law is a part of divine law which follows necessarily
from the essential nature of man, and is as unalterable as
the truths of mathematics. This law of nature, Grotius
says, is cognizable a priori by an abstract consideration of
human nature.2 Hobbes took the position that Grotius
had left unanswered the all-important question: “What
is man’s ultimate reason for obeying these laws of nature?” '
He undertook to answer it by saying that each man’s appe-
tites and desires are naturally directed either “to the pres-
ervation of his life or to the heightening of it in the way
of pleasure. Since all the voluntary actions of men tend to
their own preservation or pleasure, it cannot be reasonable to
aim at anything else; in fact, nature rather than reason
ﬁxes the end of human action, to which it is reason’s func-
tion to show the means. Hence if we ask why it is reasonable
for any individual to observe the rules of social behavior
that are commonly called moral, the answer is obvious that
this is only indirectly reasonable, as a means to his own
preservation or pleasure.” 3 Naturally there was a very

1Sidgwick, His. of Ethics, p. 159.
' Ibid., 161.
' Ibid., p. 165.

18

 

le Predecessors of Wollaston 19

strong reaction from this extreme hedonistic position and
WollastOn belongs to this reaction movement. This school
of thinkers were insistent upon the point that morality must
of necessity be based on the real nature of things, and must,
consequently, be as natural and as necessary as the natures
and relations of things. So Wollaston was inﬂuenced nega—
tively .by Hobbes. He reacted, not only from the ethical
position of Hobbes, but, perhaps, even more from the
materialistic determinism of his philosophy.4

I think that it can be said that Wollaston was inﬂu-
enced on the positive side by several very different schools
of thought. Rogers is right when he says that Wollaston
was greatly inﬂuenced in_ his thinking by Locke’s episte-
mology. He, like Locke, denied innate ideas, in general,
and innate ideas of morality in particular.‘5 Wollaston,
like the entire rationalistic school of British moralists, was
also greatly inﬂuenced by the Newtonian conception of the
universe; but, perhaps, even more by the mathematical
method of the new science. The rationalistic philosophy
of Descartes was also inﬂuential in the same way. In fact,
what Leslie Stephen says of the intellectualists, in general,
is true of Wollaston in particular. He says: “It is very
difﬁcult to tell whether the intellectualists in morals were
more inﬂuenced by the Newtonian conception of the universe,
which gave the world loftier ideas of God, and great aid and
support to morality and religion; orby Descartes’ philoso—
phy, which inspired the rationalistic method of ethics.” 6 By
the use of the mathematical method, inspired by both New-
ton and Descartes, the intellectualists claimed that they
were able to prove the existence of God and the obligations
of Natural Religion. Wollaston certainly cannot be classi-
ﬁed as a rationalist in the Cartesian sense of the term, nor
would any one think of classifying him as an empiricist. To
my mind he is far more of an empiricist than‘ a rationalist,
if rationalism is given the intuitional connotation. Rogers
is perhaps right when he says that Wollaston’s position was

‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 69 and 104—5.
' Rogers, His. of Ethics, p. 150.
'L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., p. XXXII.

 

20 The Ethics of William Wollaston

a combination of the two.7 It has been customary to call
Wollaston an Intuitionist, meaning thereby that he taught
that men have innate ideas of virtue and vice. I do not
understand him to teach any such doctrine. Rather, I
understand him to say that all of our knowledge comes
through the senses. Wollaston thinks, also, as I shall try
to show later, that we have rational synthetic minds that
are capable of organizing experience and of determining
what our duty is in any given situation of life. He believed
that there are two elements, both in knowledge and in
morality, the empirical and the rational. While Wollaston
was inﬂuenced, on the rationalistic side, by both Descartes
and Newton, he was not by any means a disciple of either,
and the inﬂuence of each upon his thinking was very general.
He did get his rationalistic attitude and method partly from
them. I say this advisedly, because this rationalistic attitude
was characteristic of the age. The rationalistic method,
however, was taken bodily from them and used by Wollaston,
as offering an analogy of morality, to determine the general
formula of morality.8

The inﬂuence of Cudworth upon Wollaston was more
speciﬁc. I think that it was his insistence upon the objec-
tive reality of moral distinctions, and his insistence that
the criterion of morality must be rational in nature, that
most impressed Wollaston. Cudworth wrote his Treatise
concerning eternal and immutable morality in answer to
Hobbes. In this work he took the position that just as
knowledge contains a permanent intelligible element over and
above the ﬂux of sense impression, so there exist eternal and
immutable ideas of morality. According to Cudworth the
distinctions of good and evil have an objective reality, “cog-
nizable by reason, no less than the relations of space and
number; the knowledge of them no doubt comes to the hu-
man mind from the divine; but it is from the divine reason,
in whose light man imperfectly participates, not merely from
the divine will as such.” Things are what they are, not by

' Rogers, His. of Ethics, p. 14.1. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. D., pp. 24, '
48-50.
' Ibid., Sec. III.

 

The Predeceuor: of Wollaston 21

will but by nature. . . . For though the will and power
of God have an absolute, inﬁnite and unlimited command
upon the existence of all created things to make them to be,
or not to be at pleasure; yet when things exist, they are
what they are.
will without nature, because everything is what it is by na-
ture, and not by will. . . . No positive commands what-
soever do make anything morally good or evil, which nature
had‘not made such before.9 Wollaston agrees with Cud-
worth that the real nature of things constitutes the basis
of morality. This is what is meant by saying that their
ethics is objective. This objective nature is discerned by
the reason, and the appropriate moral behavior is deter-
mined by the reason also.

But Wollaston was as greatly inﬂuenced by the empiri-
cists. Cudworth and Wollaston have very different ideas
as to the relation of sense and reason in knowledge, thanks
to the inﬂuence of Locke upon Wollaston; but both base
the criterion of morality on the reason. Cudworth says
that the mind has conceptions which, while occasioned by
sense, could not be formed but by a faculty superior to
sense. He does not, like Locke, believe that all knowledge
comes through the senses, but rather holds to the doctrine
of innate ideas. This doctrine of innate ideas was attacked
by Locke, and Clarke and Wollaston admit the force of
Locke’s arguments. They were, nevertheless, greatly in-
ﬂuenced by Cudworth.10 They were especially inﬂuenced
by his statement that moral relations are as evident and as
necessary as the laws of thought and the axioms of mathe-
matics. Speaking of eternal truths, Cudworth says, “Neither
are there such eternal truths as these only in mathematics
and concerning quantity, but also in ethics concerning
morality.” ‘1 Cudworth says that ethical ideas do not
come from experience, but are necessary ideas in the divine
and in the human reason. The individual mind, being derived

' Cudworth, Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality,
bk. I, ch. 9.

“Clarke, Natural Religion, p. 45. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 45.

1‘ Cudworth, Intel. System, p. 734.

 

. . . Nothing is morally good or evil by mere'

//

22 The Ethics of William Wollaston.

from the eternal mind, inherits these eternal moral truths,
is conscious of them, and realizes their obligation.12 This
extreme Intuitionalism is, of course, unnecessary, and the
universality and necessity of morality is entirely reconcil-
able with an ethical epistemology which gives due place to
the empirical factor in knowledge. Ethical ideas, Cudworth
says, cannot come from experience, for experience is always
particular, and morality must be universal and necessary.
He is right, of course, in saying that experience cannot give
universality and necessity; but, as Clarke and Wollaston
realized, his inference from this to the doctrine of innate
ideas of morality is not necessary. And yet they realized
that he was right in insisting that the distinction between
right and wrong is a rational distinction and is universal
and necessary. Clarke and Wollaston agree that it would
be contradictory to say that any power, human or divine,
could change their nature.13 The good could not be bad
nor the bad good.14 This internal perception of moral
truth, which Cudworth calls conscience, teaches men that
the good of the whole is better than individual good alone.
Thus he set for Wollaston a eudaemonistic example.“5
Cumberland’s importance, for our purpose, rests on his
attempt to supply the connecting link between moral per-
ception and moral action by identifying the good of all with
the good of each, and on his endeavor to make the utilitarian
principle of the good of all the ethical end and the standard
of moral action. The good of all is the moral standard, and
the reason is the moral faculty. He believes in the mathe-
matical certainty of moral truth, and his faith in the ulti-
mate rationality of the world is so great that he believes
that this will result in the good of humanity. He did not,
like Wollaston, say that one should consider the probable
consequences of actions and that these should enter into
the motivation. Cumberland took the position that the
Baconian method is as applicable to ethics as to natural
science. By observing external nature we discover its truths

" Cudworth, Intel. System, p. 730. '

” Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 45. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delia, p. 7.
“ Cudworth, Intel. System, p. 895. -

1' Ibid., p. 898.

 

The Predecessor: of Wollaston 23

and laws, and by studying the nature of man we discover
the relation in which he stands to the natural universe of
which he forms a part. The foundation of morality lies
in the nature of things, antecedent to all positive law, else
no reason could be given for the enactment of any law. He
deﬁnes the laws of nature as “immutany true propositions
regulative of voluntary actions as to choice of good and
avoidance of evil, and which carry with them an obligation
to outward acts of obedience.” 1“ The laws of nature are
the laws of God, so are the universal laws of right reason.
There are, he says, no innate ideas, but by means of reason
man perceives the mathematical and moral truths contained
in nature, and both are of equal certainty.17 Practical
reason points out the ends to be pursued and the means to .
those ends, and since reason is common to man, all unpreju-
diced men agree ,with regard to the fundamental principles
of morality. The mind of man naturally assents to the uni-
versal law of nature. He states this law as the universal
law of benevolence: “The greatest possible benevolence of
every rational agent towards all the rest, constitutes the
happiest state of each and all, so far as depends on their
own power, and is necessarily required for their happiness,
therefore the common good is the supreme law.” '18 The hap-
piness of all is at the same time the end of every rational
man’s actions and the standard of right and wrong."9 Cum-
berland’s dynamic is prudential hedonism. The law of
benevolence is the law both of rationality and of reality, he
says; but then he proceeds to say that it derives its obliga-
tion from the fact that only by striving to promote the hap-
piness of all can one be happy. Sidgwick says that Cum-
berland is the ﬁrst one to lay down the principle that “the
common good of all is the supreme end and the standard of
morality.” So far, says Sidgwick, he may be fairly called
the precursor of the later utilitarianism. Sidgwick says that
Cumberland meant by “the common good of all” not only
“the greatest happiness of all but perfection.” He regards

1'Cumberland, De legibus naurae Cap. V. 5.

" Ibid., Cap. V, 8.

“Cumberland, Proleg. IX.; Cap. I, 15 and Cap. III, 3.
1’Ibid.,' Cap. I, 4 and 22.

 

24s The Ethics of William Wollaston

Cumberland as a precursor of Wollaston, since, in his esti-
mation, Wollaston’s position was that of late utilitar-
ianism.2o

The connection of Locke with the moral systems of Clarke
and Wollaston is well expressed by Erdmann: “In the ﬁrst
book of his Essay, Locke had placed speculative and practi-
cal principles on the same plane. In regard to the former,
however, he had supplemented the negative result that they
are not innate, by the positive statement that they are pre-
sented to us by the external world. Exactly the same pro-
cess must be looked for in the case of the latter: the mind
cannot draw the principles of action from within itself; they
must come to it from without, and not, as mediaaval philoso-
phy had taught, through revelation, but from the external
world. This positive addition to Locke’s negative asser-
tion was made by some thinkers who are connected with him,
not merely by nationality, but also by the fact that they
owe to him their ﬁrst impulse towards philosophy.” Erd-
mann, then, expressly mentions Clarke and Wollaston.21

Wundt also connects Locke directly with the objective
intellectualists. Locke, he says, even draws a comparison
between the application of moral rules to particular cases
and the application of mathematical axioms. Such state—
ments clearly bear the closest relation to his opinion that
“all judgments on moral values are the results of rational
insight and intellectual deliberation.” 22 This opinion con-
nects Locke with the Cambridge Intellectualists, says
Wundt, butthey are, he says, distinguished from Locke by
the fact that his morality was subjective whereas their cri-
terion was objective. “Their attempt is rather to show the
objective reality of the moral law, from which its obligatory
force necessarily follows.” Whereas the subjective intel-
lectualists, as Wundt terms them, make the natural law to
be a thing of empirical origin in our sensations of pleasure
and pain, the objective intellectualists, Clarke and Wollas-
ton, have moral norms that are claimed to possess an ob-

”Sidgwick, His. of Ethics, p. 174.
“Erdmann, His. of Phil., vol. II, p. 116.
” Wundt, Ethics, p. 323.

 

The Predecessors of Wollasto-n 25

jective reality equal to that of mathematical or physical
laws. A transgression of law in the moral realm is like a
change which disobeys the laws of physical nature.

For Locke, as for the objective moralists, Clarke and
Wollaston, morality is essentially a matter of conformity
to relations. For Locke there are three fundamental cer—
tainties; the existence of the self, of God and of the world,
and there are three corresponding fundamental ethical con-
ceptions; man, God and nature. The foundation of morality
does not lie in the nature of man alone, but in the nature and
character of God, the creator of the universe. God cannot
act contrary to his own nature, and so the laws of the uni-
verse are as unchangeable as God himself; for the laws of
nature are the laws of the divine nature, the will and the
command of God. Thus the law of nature is eternal and
unchangeable, the rule of God to himself and to all his
creatures. Into this divine order man is born, a sociable
being endowed with reason. By means of reason, which is
the only ethical faculty, man perceives and recognizes the
law of nature, which is at the same time the law of God.
There are moral relations, which are capable of being ration—
ally perceived antecedent to all positive revelation. In the
law of nature reason discovers the foundation of duties and
rights. The various kinds of duties are founded on various
relations ;—the duty of piety, on the relation of man to God;
the duties of benevolence, equity and love arise from the
various relations men stand to one another.28

Clarke, of course, stands a great deal closer to Wollaston,
both in time and in thought, than did any of his other pre-
decessors. Wollaston was, in fact, an older contemporary
of Clarke, but his book was not published until two years
before his death, 1722, while Clarke’s work on the same sub-
ject was published in 1706. Clarke’s philosophy represents
a reaction both from the materialistic determinism of Hobbes
and from the spirituali-stic determinism of Calvin. He sought
to deﬁne right and wrong so clearly and to place the dis-
tinction between them on such a solid foundation that moral
relations would be as indubitable as are mathematical rela-

" Locke, Essay on the Human Understanding, Bk. IV, ch. 9.

 

26 The Ethics of William Wollaston

tions. This he did by making reason and morality conform.
He insisted, however, upon making an important distinction,
a distinction equally important in Wollaston’s system: “The
only difference is, that assent to a plain speculative truth
is not in a man’s power to withhold, but to act according to
the plain right and reason of things, this he may, by the
natural liberty of his will, forbear.” 2‘ Wollaston’s ethics,
also, attempts to ground morality on the very nature of
things, and to show moral relations to be necessary and in-
dubitable. He, also, says that assent to truth is necessary,
but acts conformable to truth are contingent upon free
choice. This objectivity of the moral standard, and this
insistence upon freedom make both Clarke and Wollaston
stand out distinctly.25 Erdmann says that: “These two
had placed the determining factor in the object, but had
left it to the choice of the subject whether or not to fol-
low it.” 2"

Clarke undertakes to state a complete moral principle in
terms of “ﬁtness” of actions to the objective nature of
things. He says that things stand one to another in cer-
tain relations which are necessary and eternal; and that we
can conceive nothing without, at the same time, conceiving
its relations to other things. There are such relations be-
tween man and God and between man and man, and from
such relations there arises a “ﬁtness” or “unﬁtness” of ac-
tions. The whole of these relations constitutes truth.
“These eternal different relations of things constitute or
at least involve eternal ﬁtness or unﬁtness in the application
of things one to another; with regard to which the will of
God always . . . chooses . . ., and which ought likewise
to determine the wills of all subordinate rational beings.
These eternal and necessary differences of things make it ﬁt
and reasonable for these creatures so to act; they cause it
to be their duty and lay an obligation on them to act in ac-

“Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, vol. II, p. 14. i

" “Hatten diesen beiden zwar den determinirenden Grund in die Ob-
jecte gesetz, dagegen es dem Belieben des Subjectes anheimgestellt, ob

es ihmfolgen wolle.”
" Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 107.

 

The Predecessor: of Wbllaston 27

cordance with the eternal ﬁtness of things.” 27 To deny that
I should do for another man what he in like case should do
for me, “and to deny it, either in word or action is as if a
man should contend that, though two and three are equal
to ﬁve, yet ﬁve is not equal to two and three.” 31 “Wicked-
ness,” according to Clarke, “is the same absurdity and in-
solence in morals, as it would be in natural things to pretend
to alter the relations of numbers, or to change the prop-
erties of geometrical ﬁgures.” 32

Lowman, one of Clarke’s followers, says, that Clarke con-
ceived of morality as “the practice of reason.” 33 Morality
for Clarke, says Falckenberg, is the subjective conformity
to the objective “ﬁtness of things.” The good is the ﬁtting.
Certain things, relations, and modes of action are suited
to one another and. others not. “He who is induced by
passion to act contrary to the eternal relations or harmony
of things, contradicts his own reason in thus undertaking
to disturb the order of the universe; he commits the ab-
surdity of willing that things should be that which they
are not. Injustice is in practice that which falsity and con—
tradiction are in theoretical affairs.” 3‘

The positions of Clarke and Wollaston are so very similar
on most questions that it has been common to practically
identify them. I do not deny the justiﬁcation of that pro-
cedure. I do wish, however, to call attention to the fact
that Wollaston does not acknowledge indebtedness to Clarke.
Rather, he insists that his treatment is original: “That,
which is advanced in the following papers, concerning the
nature of moral good and evil, and is the prevailing thought
that runs through them all, I never met with anywhere.” 35
Only once in his entire book does he use the terminology of
Clarke, and even in that instance the use may well be acci-
dental. The word used by Wollaston is, however, Clarke’s

"Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, vol. II, pp. 3-7.
'1 Ibid., 619. j

” Clarke, Evidences, p. 42.

“Lowman, Unity and Perfection of God, p. 29.

" Falckenberg, His. of Phil., pp. 196-7.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 6.

 

28 The Ethics of William Wollaston

favorite term, namely, “ﬁt.” We can say that there is no
verbal dependence, for even in the case just mentioned
Clarke never uses “ﬁt” but “ﬁtness” or “ﬁting.” The
thoughts of the two men, though, with reference to the cri-
terion of morality are so very similar that it is quite im-
possible for me to doubt the dependence of the one on the
other. On two rather important questions of the time the
men diﬂ‘ered considerable, namely, the question of the rela-
tion of happiness to virtue and the question of the relation
of truth and revelation.

Perhaps there is more difference between Clarke and
Wollaston on the question of happiness than on any other,
and this difference is, I suppose, responsible for the fact
that Wollaston has often been classed with the hedonists,
while Clarke has never been so classed. Clarke says that
happiness is a necessary consequent of acting according to
the ﬁtness of things. “God,” he says, “will certainly cause
truth and right to terminate in happinss.” 3" ‘He says
that virtue “tends to the good of the world” as certainly as
physical effects or mathematical truth follow from its prin-
ciples.” It may be said, in general, that Clarke considers
happiness more as the necessary consequent of true living,
and that the desire to be happy and make others happy
does not enter into the motivation of moral actions to the
same extent with him as with Wollaston. It is true that
Wollaston does insist that happiness is the natural and
necessary consequence of right living; but he also empha-
sizes the fact that one should deliberately consider the
happiness or unhappiness that can be expected to result
from a given action, and that without so doing one cannot
be said to be acting truly. It is, Wollaston thinks, wrong
not to treat happiness as what it is, a true mental state
and a desirable human good.38

Vorlander says that while Clarke takes the objective
ethical principle of the ﬁtness of actions only from the uni-
versal metaphysical side, Wollaston tries to deﬁne it more

" Clarke, Nat. Bali. in British Moralists, 512.

’7 Ibid., 5‘24.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delia, p. 38.

 

The Predecessors of W‘ollaston 29

deﬁnitely, partly by means of reference to the particular
purposes of things, partly “through more deﬁnite reference
to the principle of happiness.” 3" Wollaston does make a
signiﬁcant advance from the position taken by Clarke in that
he gave far more consideration to consequences, in so far
as they can be anticipated, and human happiness is the most
important of all the consequences that must be considered.
I would go so far as to say that such a consideration must
constitute an all important part of every moral action, and
that due place must be given to the consideration of conse-
quences by any system of ethics that makes any pretence
of being based on an objective foundation. The principle,
otherwise, is that of Intuitionism. Clarke does say that God
created the world only that he might communicate to his
creatures goodness and happiness, and that he expects and
requires that all his creatures should endeavor to promote
happiness among men.40 There is another passage which
better represents Clarke’s position and shows himto be more
eudaamonistic than do these passages. I refer to the pas-
sage with which he begins hi great work on Natural Religion,
a passage which states the thesis of his work and gives, in
one sentence, his metaphysics, philosophy of religion, and
philosophy of morals: “The same necessary and eternal
different relations, that different things bear one to another,
and the same consequent ﬁtness or unﬁtness of the applica-
tion of different relations one to another, with regard to
which the will of God always and necessarily does determine
itself, to choose to act only what is agreeable to justice,
equity, goodness and truth, in order to the welfare of the
whole universe, ought likewise constantly to determine the
wills of all subordinate rational beings, to govern all their
actions by the same rule, for the good of the public.” 41
For Clarke, then, consequences, in so far as they can be
anticipated, must necessarily enter into every motivation;
and are involved in acting “according to the ﬁtness of

" “durch die bestimmtere Beziehung auf das Princip der Gliickselig-
keit.” Vorliinder, Gesch. der Philosophischen Moral, etc., p. 386.

‘° Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, 524.

“ Clarke, Nat. Reli., I, Intro.

 

30 The Ethics of William Wollaston

things.” It is true, however, that Clarke does think of
happiness more as the necessary consequence of acting ac—
cording to moral principles and less as an element in the
motivation. He leaves happiness to providence and has the
faith to believe that it will result from treating everything
according to nature.

The article in Chambers’ Encyclopedia says that Wollas-
ton’s system is a deVelopment of Clarke’s system. This is
undoubtedly true in the sense that Wollaston went further
away from ecclesiastical ethics. As the article well says
“his methods were exclusively rational,” whereas Clarke de-
pended more on religious authority and religious sanctions.42
Both Clarke and Wollaston take as their starting point
“the clearness, immutability and universality of the law of
nature.” 43 They agree that morality is founded upon “the
eternal and necessary differences of things,” and that the
essentials of morality rest upon as sure a foundation as the
laws of thought in logic or the axioms in mathematics.“
An interesting question arose as to the relation of revela-
tion to such a view of ethics. It was seen very clearly that
an inspired system of ethics is no more necessary than an
inspired system of mathematics. Clarke, however, did not
regard revelation as superﬂuous as did Wollaston. He took
the position that while revelation is not necessary to reveal
a code of morality it is necessary to reveal the sanctions of
that code. He thinks with Wollaston that the reason is a
sufﬁcient guide to morals, that revelation is not necessary
to tell men how they ought to live. He thinks that revela-
tion is necessary, however, to tell men that a true life leads
to everlasting happiness and that a wicked life leads to
everlasting misery. Clarke thinks that most men will be
too weak to live right without a belief in the hereafter. So
while Clarke is as sincerely anxious to prove that moral
principles are binding, independent of Divine appointment,
as is Wollaston, he is no less concerned that morality re-
quires the support of revealed religion. So while he be-

“ Art. Wollaston, Chambers Ency., vol. 10, p. 709.

“L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. I, p. 123.
“ Clarke, Works, pp. 609-13. ‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. D., p. 24.

 

The Predecessor: of Wollaston 81

lieves that “virtue is worthy to be chosen for its own sake”
and also that the virtuous life necessarily leads to happi-
ness, he still thinks revelation to be necessary “for the
reformation of mankind.” He says that revelation is needed
as a bulwark of truth, particularly concerning the here-
after, “for without revelation many men could not forbear
doubting a future state of retribution or reward, in spite
of the strongest arguments of reasons.” 45 Wollaston makes
only one reference to revelation and that is in connection
with his treatment of the problem of evil. He had said that
“there must be a future life where proper amends may be
made,” where the wrongs of this world may be made right.
If this life be all, he argued, “the general and usual state
of mankind is scarce consistent with the idea of a reason-
able cause.” “ But how can we be sure that God will reward
virtue in the next world more liberally than in this? In
trying to answer this question, he says, he “begin to be
very sensible how much he wants a guide.” 47 ‘He does not,
however, grant that we have a guide other than reason, for,
in his view, the Scriptures constitute only that kind of
guide.48 The only solution of the problem of evil, thinks
Wollaston, and revelation can offer no other, is belief in
the ultimate rationality of the universe.49 So we can say
with the Grande Dictionnaire Universel that “Wollaston
made morality to rest upon a foundation entirely indepen-
dent of revelation.” 5°

" Clarke, Works, pp. 643, 646, 652 and 667.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delia, p. 205. o

‘1' Ibid., p. 211.

0 Ibid., Sec. IX, Prop. xii.

“Ibid., pp. 72 and 113-14..
'° Grande Dict. Universel, Art. Wollaston.

 

THE RELIGION OF NATURE DELINEATED

SECTION I
“or MORAL GOOD AND EVIL”

This thesis is an endeavor to give a systematic and criti-
cal exposition of the Ethics of William Wollaston, but since
he was the author of only one work on that subject, “The
Religion of Nature Delineated,” this treatment naturally
takes the form of a critical commentary on that book. I
have tried to harmonize his order of treatment with a strictly
logical and systematic procedure. Since my purpose is to
delineate his Ethics, and to treat other aspects of his gen-
eral discussion from that point of view, I have in several in-
stances departed from his order of treatment.

INTRODUCTION
THE RELATION OF MORALITY AND NATURAL RELIGION

“The foundation of religion,” says Wollaston, “lies in
that difference between the acts of men, which distinguishes
them into good, evil, indifferent. For if there is such a
difference, there must be religion; and contra.” Erdmann
understands him to mean by this that all religion is based
on the difference which men must make between good and
bad, and where such difference is made you have religion.
He understands that: “Nothing else is here meant by reli-
gion but the obligation to do What may not be omitted and
to refrain from doing what may not be done (So wird hier
unter Religion nicht Andres verstanden, als die Verpﬂichtung,
zu thun was nicht unterlossen). . . . To obey the law which
God has given is religion in general, and to obey.that law
in particular which he reveals unto us when we rightly em-

32

 

The Religion of Nature Deli/mated 33

ploy our natural abilities is the religion of nature or natural
religion.” 1 So Wollaston begins his work by seeking to ﬁnd
the ultimate ground of natural religion. He grounds N at-
ural Religion in the distincton that men naturally must make
between good and evil. It is the necessity of thinking that
constitutes the necessity and the universality of this dis-
tinction.

Just as Natural Religion is based on natural morality,
‘so is morality grounded in the nature of things. Moralists,
Wollaston says, have long sought for some idea or principle
that would decide the morality of acts, but have not come
to any agreement. He proposes a principle that he considers
self-evident, and implies that this is the principle which has
really determined men’s evaluations of conduct. Wollaston
proposes the plain and obvious principle of evaluation, used
by the plain man, as the moral criterion. He says just let
things “speak for themselves,” and they will “proclaim their
own rectitude or obliquity.” 2 He means by this that the
nature and relations of things determine their moral char—
acter. Selby-Bigge says that the British moralists of all
schools base morality on the nature of things, and all make
their appeal to the ordinary man’s ideas of virtue rather
than to those of saints and philosophers.3

‘ I

In this paragraph Wollaston discusses the necessary im-
plications of morality, intelligence and freedom. “That
act, which‘may be denominated morally good or evil, must
be the act of a being capable of distinguishing, choosing and
acting for himself; or more brieﬂy, of an intelligent and
free agent.” Blakey suggests that Wollaston was inﬂu-
enced by William King’s book, “Treatise on the Origin of
Evil,” as well as by Clarke, in arriving at his conception
of the freedom of the will and of its importance for moral—
ity.‘ But Erdmann is right in saying that the starting

3 Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 113.
’Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
'Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, p. XVII.

‘ Blakey, His. of Morals, p. 208.

 

34 The Ethics of William Wollaston

point in Wollaston’s thinking is with the ideas of good and
evil as necessary ideas because of the very nature of things.
Then he arrives at the notion of freedom as the necessary
implication of good and evil. In this division Wollaston lays
down the preconditions of morality,—intelligence and free-
dom.‘5 Properly speaking, he says, “no act at all can be
ascribed to that being which is not indued with these ca-
pacities,” and certainly no moral character can be applied
to acts other than those of a “being capable of distinguish-
ing, choosing and acting for himself.” 6 All other kinds
of acts are but the acts of an instrument, acts “under a
necessity incumbent ab extra” and consequently not moral
acts at all.7

Wollaston’s only proof of freedom, in this section of his
work, is that it is the necessary precondition of morality. If
he had been asked, but why must there be morality? I sup-
pose that he would have answered very much as did Kant,
later “I know that I ought.” But while Kant attributed
the feeling of ought to an intuition, to an indubitable and
immediate impingement of the moral conscience speaking
within; Wollaston could say, only, that intelligence demands
that we treat things according to their natures, that we act
conformany with reason. The one constitutes a moral im-
perative as much as does the other. So while Kant’s ought
is subjective, resting as it does on intuition, and Wollaston’s
ought is objective, being based on experience and ratio-
cination; still “If we ought we can” holds as much for Wol-
laston as for Kant. Wollaston does not say that we have
an immediate consciousness of freedom nor an immediate
consciousness of ought, but both are for him the product
of thinking about the natures of things and of our rela-
tions there-to. As intelligent beings we cannot do otherwise
than perceive the natures of things and our relations to the
rest of reality. In view of these natures and relations we see
that there are duties we ought to perform or else be false
to ourselves and to the universe. So if we ought we can,

' Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 114.
‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
' Ibid., p. 8.

 

The Religion of Nature Delimated 85

and since we know that we ought we know that we can, for
freedom is the necessary precondition of there being an
ought.

II

This paragraph is concerned with deﬁning the nature of
truth. “Those propositions are true, which express things
as they are; or, truth is the conformity of those words or
signs, by which things are exprest, to the things them-
selves.” 3 Here Wollaston is asserting what he understands
by truth. It is, he says, the conformity of thought and
language to reality.

III

The topic of this paragraph is the nature of goodness.
“A true proposition may be denied, or things may be denied
to be what they are, by deeds, as well as by express words or
another proposition.” 9 It has frequently been thought that
in this proposition Wollaston is just simply saying that
there is another way of asserting or denying truth. He
seems to have anticipated the danger of being misunder-
stood here and tried‘to safeguard against it. It is true
that he says that “things may be denied to be what they are
by deeds,” but that he is doing something other than merely
describing a form of existential judgment is quite evident
from his own statement. After saying that “there is mean-
ing in many acts and gestures” and that “everybody under—
stands weeping, laughing, shrugs, frowns, these are a sort
of universal language”; he then goes on to say: “But these
instances do not come up to my meaning.” Why do not
these instances of actions which either afﬁrm or deny things
to be what they are” come up to his meaning? I think it is
because he is not referring to the different methods that
may be employed to convey meaning, to afﬁrm or to deny
the conformity of thoughts with things. He is not dealing

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.
' Ibid., p. 8.

 

36 The Ethics of William Wollaston

with theoretical matters at all, but with moral considera-
tions. “There are many acts,” he says, “of other kinds,”
that is, acts different from acts of the pantomime variety.
“There are,” he says, “many acts of other kinds, such as
constitute the character of a man’s conduct in life, which
have in nature, and would be taken by any indifferent judge
to have a signiﬁcation, and to imply some proposition, as
plainly to be understood as if it were declared in words; and
therefore if what such acts declare to be, is not, they must
contradict truth, as much as any false proposition, or as-
sertion can.” 10 Wollaston tried to deﬁne truth in Propo-
sition II, while in Proposition III he sought to eXplicate
goodness by comparing it to truth. It is here that he has
been so much misunderstood. This is particularly unfor-
tunate, because it constitutes the very crux of his argument.
For, as Ueberweg well says, the entire book is an analogous
treatment of morality. “The characteristic of this treatise
is that it makes virtue to consist in acting according to
truth.” 11 a

The position I wish to maintain is that Wollaston does not
identify truth and goodness. In his system morality is
thought of as really afﬁrming a true relationship, but that is
not by any means saying that morality is mere assent to a
true prOposition. It is as true as such assent, and immor-
ality is as false as the denial of a self-evidently true propo-
sition. The two processes are very different, the one is
merely intellectual while the other is moral. There is a
great difference between intellectual assent, which is deter-
mined by the nature of things, and a moral act, which is
contingent on free choice. The value judgment embodied in
a moral act is expressive of the self and of character, while
the intellectual assent to a true relation involved in an
existential judgment has no such connection with the will,
the character, or the self. It has been said that Wollaston
just reduces morality to existential judgments, when he
says, “If what such acts declare to be, is not, they must
contradict truth, as much as any false proposition or asser-

1’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.
“Ueberweg, His. of Phil., vol. II, p. 882.

 

uni—1W J“ 7

The Religion of Nature Delineated 37 .

tioncan.” This cannot be said with justice for Wollaston
is very insistent upon the fact that here he is talking about
“such acts as constitute the character of a man’s conduct
in life.” 12

Just what is Wollaston saying when he says, “if what such
acts declare to be is not, they must contradict truth as
much as any false proposition or assertion can”? He cer—
tainly is not saying that this is but' another way of denying
or contradicting truth, but rather is he not saying that
immorality is as contradictory as a false proposition? The
difference is this,—a man cannot deny a true proposition.
As intelligent beings, we can but assent to what convinces
us is true. But, thanks to our freedom, we can act con-
tradictory. The immoral act is not a lie, as many of Wol—
laston’s critics accuse him of teaching, it is not a contradic-
tory existential judgment; but, what he says is, that it is
just as absurd as to fail to assent to truth when we recog-
nize a true relation. Wollaston does not say that moral
deeds are propositions. What he does say is. that a moral
deed is an afﬁrmation of true relations, and that an immoral
act is a denial of these relations. This interpretation is
found in the unsigned article on Wollaston in the Britannica:
“He claims originality for his theory that moral evil is the
practical denial of a true proposition and moral good the
afﬁrmation of it.” 13 This I consider to be one of the best
statements of his position that I have found. The word
“practical” is generally left out, with the result that an ab-
solutely different meaning is given. “Practical” is really
the key word in the statement of his moral theory, and when
it is accentuated immorality is not deﬁned as the denial of a
true proposition. The theory, rather, is that immorality
implies the truth of the proposition and then acts as if it
were not true, or “practically” denies, the admittedly true,
proposition.

There are two kinds of acts, says Wollaston. He, then,
tries to show the very great difference between them. . The
one kind of acts, he says, in eff'ect, merely expresses intela

1’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.
1"Anon., Art. on Wollaston in Britan., vol. 98, p. 776.

 

88 The Ethics of William Wollaston

lectual meaning: “It is certain there is a meaning in many
acts and gestures.” The other kind of acts are moral acts,
“such as constitute the character of a man’s conduct in life.”
The very same action may, under different circumstances,
have these two very different meanings. A bow of the head,
for example, may be merely a gesture expressing, in sign
language, the proposition to-day is Tuesday. At another
time and under other circumstances the action might have
a moral quality, in that the one who performed such an act
might thereby deny essential human relations, might thereby
will the destruction of human society. In so acting, says
Wollaston, one “would contribute his share towards the in-
troduction of universal disorder and misery,” and would for
his part deny human life to be what it is, would deny human
society to be what it is.14

Illustrative of this point I wish to give some material
which I found in a work on criminal psychology. Gross
says: “Purely physiological conditions operate in many di-
rections, such as blushing, trembling, laughing, weeping;
and very few men want to show their minds openly to their
friends, so that they see no reason for co-ordinating their
symbolic bodily expressions. Nevertheless, they do so, and
not since yesterday, but for thousands of years. Hence
deﬁnite expressions have been transmitted for generations.
Characteristically, the desire to fool others has its predeter-
mined limitations, so that it often happens that simple and
signiﬁcant gestures, contradict words when the latter are
false.” Gross takes as a case a man who “assured us,” in
words, of course, “that he lived very peaceably with his
neighbors and at the same time clinched his ﬁst. The latter
meant ill will toward the neighbor while the words did not.”
Gross is saying that gesture language, involuntarily, speaks
the truth, oftentimes, even when our words are trying to
deceive.15

Clarke is, perhaps, a little clearer than Wollaston on this
point of the relation of the intellectual and the moral. “The
only difference,” he says, “is that assent to a plain specu-

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 8 and 143.
1‘ Gross, Kriminal Psychologie, Part 1, Topic 3.

 

oWr—‘F1 ‘7 __‘__-p—-LM-A—- w

The Religion of Nature Delineated 89

lative truth, is not in a man’s power to withhold; but to act
according to the plain right and reason of things, this he
may, by the natural liberty of his will, forbear. But the
one he ought to do; and ’tis as much his plain and indis-
pensable duty; as the other he cannot but do, and ’tis the
necessity of his nature to do it.” 1" His thought is that as
assent to plain intellectual truth is necessary to sanity, so to
act in conformity, while not necessitated, is necessary to the
fulﬁllment of life relations and so to moral self-realization.
Garve undertook to offer an interpretation of this para-
graph of Wollaston’s treatise and for some reason inclosed
his discussion in quotation marks. These statements of Garve
are for the most part fair to the teachings of Wollaston,
except on this one point of the relation of the intellectual
and the moral. Garve begins with the words “VVollaston
sagt,” implying that What follows is quoted from the work
of Wollaston, so it is not to be wondered at that Von Hart-
mann and other German writers should think that they were
quoting from Wollaston, in form of Garve’s supposed trans-
lation, when they are only quoting from Garve’s interpreta-
tive remarks. “Every action is good which expresses a true
proposition. Truth is the highest. To recognize truth and
to represent it in one’s words and deeds, alive and effective,
is the ultimate end of man. The ability to recognize truth
makes a man a rational being, and through the endowments
of his nature to express truth also in action he becomes a
moral being (durch die Anlagen seiner N atur, Wahrheit auch
in Handlungen auszudriicken, wird er ein sittliches We-
sen).” 1" So far I have no fault to ﬁnd with the interpreta-
tion, but as he proceeds we see that he interprets the Wol-
lastonian Ethics as based on' an essential identiﬁcation of
the intellectual and the moral. He says: “As man expresses
his ideas and words by means of language he can indicate
them also and communicate them to others by means of ac-
tions. This is clear to everybody in the form of. gestures,
but only the most attentive observer can discover that every

” Clarke, Evidences, p. 188.
" Garve, Uebersicht der vornehmsten Principien Sittenl., p. 172. Von
Hartmann, Phanomenologic des Sittlichin Bewusstseins, p. 845.

 

4.0 The Ethics of William Wollaston

action without exception expresses a certain proposition
(dass jede Handlung, ohne Ausnahme, einen gewissen Satz
ausdriickt).” Garve, it is clear, does not make any distinc-
tion between gestures and other forms of action and so misses
Wollaston’s meaning entirely. This is even more evident in
what he next says: “In der Wahrheit oder Unwahrheit dieses
Satzes liegt die Sittlichkeit oder Unsittlichkeit der Hand-
lung.” 18 This is not Wollaston’s meaning at all. The mor-
ality does not lie in the truth or falsity of the proposition
but in the truth or falsity of the action. The proposition
is just as true when the action is false as when it is true,
otherwise there would be no inconsistency and consequently
no wrong.

Garve gets the big idea in the Ethics of Wollaston, namely,
that the criterion is objective, that the natures of things de-
termine how they should be treated. Wollaston does insist
that inanimate objects, animals and human beings by their
very different natures indicate that they should be treated
very differently. Since animals have feelings this must be
taken into consideration in our treatment of them, and since
man has both feelings and reason he should be treated as
possessing both. Wollaston says that if mankind be diﬁ'er—
entiated from the rest of the animal kingdom by reason, then
the rational nature of man must be a large factor in the
determination of the treatment properly to be accorded a
man.19 Garve, however, fails to understand Wollaston be-
cause he seems to try to translate an immoral action into
some kind of false proposition. “If I torment an animal,”
he has Wollaston say, “I express thereby the proposition, I
take this animal to be a being without feeling and therefore
I treat it like my table or a stone.” In torturing an animal
I do not thereby express the proposition “Ich halte diess
Thier fﬁr ein empﬁndungsloses Wesen.” On the contrary,
I know, and must as an intelligent being declare, it to be a
creature with feelings. It is true, that I “behandle es daher
so, wie meinen Tisch, oder einen Stein.” The same can be
said of the next statement he puts into Wollaston’s mouth:

1' Garve, Uebersicht der vornehmsten Prin. der Sittenl.,  173.
1’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 27 and 128..

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 41

“If I make a slave of a person I express thereby the propo-
sition; this man is an irrational being, which I can use for
my purpose like horses and oxen without his consent.” 2°
But by treating a man like horses and oxen I only act as if
he were an irrational being. I do not by my inhuman treat-
ment of him make the declaration “dieser Mensch ist ein
vernunftloses Wesen.” In fact, implicit in my mistreatment
of the man is the indubitable truth that the man is a rational
being, otherwise there would be no inconsistency in my be-
havior. This same confusion of intellectual contradiction
with moral inconsistency appears in the generalization which
he has Wollaston make: “Wenn ich ungerecht handle, so
erklare ich dadurch, dass ich mich fiir kein Glied der Mensch-
lichen Gesellshaft halte.” 21 Wollaston does not take the
position that when a man acts immorally he, thereby, de-
clares that he does not consider himself a member of human
society. He has, it is true, acted as if there were no human
society and as if he were no member thereof; but the im-
morality does not consist in the denial of the evidently true,
as Garve thinks. The immorality consist, rather, in the
inconsistency of the actions with the truth.

John Clarke, Wollaston’s contemporary, says that he is
not at all sure “that all immoral actions deny more truth
than they aﬂirm,” so it cannot, he thinks, he argued that they
are for that reason immoral. 22 As many truths, he says,
could be afﬁrmed in regard to “any species of vicious action

. as for the denial of it.” In the ﬁrst place, I would
answer, it is not the position of Wollaston that immorality
is just a denial of true propositions. In the second place,
considering truth in the broad sense as true to the relations
and meanings of life, as Wollaston does, John Clarke cer-
tainly cannot deny that vicious actions are essentially false.
They are, to be sure, in conformity to some particular truth,
but they contradict the larger truths and deny the indis-
soluble unity of life and the world. Wollaston anticipates
this objection, when he says that there are many true propo-

’° Garve, Uebersicht der vornehmsten Prin. der Sittenl., p. 173.
n Ibid., p. 174..
I"J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 19.

 

42 The Ethics of William Wollaston

sitions which imply no moral relations, since persons are
not involved.23

In regard to the contention of Wollaston “that men may
by their actions deny truth,” ’John Clarke says, that the
only meaning this can have is that “actions . . . are ex-
pressive . . . of propositions,” that they are ways “of con-
veying . . . sense . . . to the minds of others.” 2‘ This
is the same confusion we found in Garve. The confusion is
due to the failure to understand that Wollaston speaks of
actions which express merely intellectual meaning, such as
gestures and pantomimes, and also of actions expressive of
character, moral action. This confusion is made evident by
what follows. Clarke says that all that Wollaston can mean
is that an action may convey a false impression “even where
a person has no intention by his action of conveying any
such sense to the minds of others.” 2'5 Clarke goes on to say
that “the difﬁculty of making a determination will grow with
the number of signiﬁcations the same action may have . . .
to different people.” The civility of a sharper, for ex-
ample, makes a very different impression upon a green-horn
to that made upon a man of the world. His actions, how-
ever, are precisely the same in the two instances.26 “But,”
says Clarke, I“supposing actions rightly denominated im-
moral did really imply a denial of the truth . . . a denial
of things to be what they are; yet how will it follow from
such a denial, that those actions therefore are truly and
properly immoral, that is contrary to the will and good
pleasure of God, declared by the voice of reason, or the
light of nature?” 27

Having deﬁned truth and goodness and determined the
nature of each Wollaston, next, proceeds to illustrate each.
His ﬁrst case is an example of an act which aﬂirms a false
proposition to be true or denies a true proposition to be
false. It is that of a body of soldiers ﬁring upon another
body thinking them to be enemies when they are friends.

"J. Clarke, etc, from p. 19. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 81.
“J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 20.

.“Ibid., p. 19.

" Ibid., p. 21.

1' Ibid., p. 35.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 43

This case of the soldiers illustrates actions that express or
deny true relations, but not acts expressive of character,
since they are based on error. True, as Wollaston says,
the truth or falsity “does not depend upon the aﬂirmer’s
knowledge or ignorance”; because words have a ﬁxed mean—
ing and do, as a matter of fact, conform, “agree or disagree
to that, concerning which the afﬁrmation is made.” But is
he not confusing the intellectual and the moral when he
goes on to say: “The thing is the same still, if .into the place
of words be substituted actions?” No, for actions of this
kind could have no moral character and so would be ac-
tions of the pantomime order expressing meaning, not char-
acter. “The salute here was in nature the salute of an
enemy, but should have been the salute of a friend; therefore
it implied a falsity,” but no moral character attaches to it.
This, I take it, like acts of the gesture and pantomime va-
riety, “do not come up” to Wollaston’s “meaning.” 28
Wollaston, then, gives instances of the “acts of the other
kind, such as constitute the character of a man’s conduct
in life.” “When Popilius Laenas solicited to have Cicero
proscribed, and that he might ﬁnd him out and be his exe-
cutioner, would not his carriage have sufﬁciently signiﬁed
to any one, who was ignorant of the case, that Tully either
was some very bad man, and deserved capital punishment;
or had some way grievously injured this man; or at least had
not saved his life, nor had as much reason to expect his
service and good oﬂices upon occasion, as he ever had to ex-
pect Tully’s? And all these things being false, were not his
behavior and actions expressive of that which was false, or
contradictions to truth? It is certain he acted as if those
things had been true, which were not true, and as if those
had not been true which were true (in this consisted the fault
of his ingratitude); and if he in words had said they were
true or not true, he had done no more than talk as if they
were so; why then should not to act as if they were true
or not true, when they were otherwise, contradict truth as
much as to say they were so, when they were not so.” 29

" Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 9.
" Ibid., p. 9.

 

494 The Ethics of William Wollaston

John Clarke thinks that this criterion of Wollaston which
undertakes to explicate morality in terms of truth is a fail-
ure. He thinks that the matter of agreement to truth is
ethically speaking irrelevant and undertakes to prove this
by a consideration of Wollaston’s own cases. Clarke says
“It would be easy to multiply instances of actions, very
serious in their signiﬁcations, some of which would be agree-
able to truth, others not.” Take Wollaston’s case of Popil-
lius Laenas’ solicitation to have Cicero proscribed. The
absolute irrelevance of conformity or non-conformity of ac-
tions to truth is quite apparent, he thinks. Clarke says that
by Wollaston’s own confession Laenas’ action had various
signiﬁcations “to any one, who was ignorant of the case,”
namely, “that Tully either was some very bad man,” or “had
not saved his life,” or “had in some way grievously injured
this man.” Clarke asks “what would that carriage of his
have signiﬁed to any one that was not ignorant of the case,
but knew Tully to be ‘a person of eminent parts, learning,
eloquence and virtue, that had merited highly from his
country, and particularly from Laenas, whose life he had
saved? Why ’tis as clear as the sun can be at noonday,
that to such a person it would have had no one of those
various signiﬁcations, but only this, that Laenas was what
the world calls an ungrateful proﬂigate villain.’ ” 3° I am
very sure that Clarke has not refuted Wollaston. He has
not proved the irrelevance of the principle of agreeableness
to truth. To be sure the actions of Laenas would have had
a much more deﬁnite signiﬁcation to one familiar to the case;
but Wollaston says, that to even one entirely ignorant of
the case, his “carriage” clearly “signiﬁed” that he was act-
ing inconsistently with relations of a friendly kind obtaining
between Cicero and himself. Wollaston is only concerned
to say that Laenas’ actions were unﬁtting to the circum-
stances, that his action would naturally lead one ignorant
of the circumstances to infer that they were quite otherwise.
In a word his “carriage” was indicative of evil, not good.
But says Clarke “since the same actions have various sig-
niﬁcances . . . our author’s new scheme of morality appears

"J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 24.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 495

clogged with insuperable difﬁculties,” because we cannot tell
“what signiﬁcations we are to have regard to, in forming
a judgment of the morality or immorality of human ac-
tions.” 31 No, Wollaston says the relations concerning per-
sons are the ones to have particular “regard to” although
everything should be treated as what it is. However various
the signiﬁcations of the actions of Laenas to the different
casual observers they made one general impression.32

In regard to these two instances we could wish more
clearness on one point, namely, that of making clear that
in the ﬁrst example the objectively inappropriate act, act
not in conformity‘to the nature of things, was done ignor-
antly and innocently. Whereas in the second instance the
objectively inappropriate and incongruous act was done in-
telligently and wilfully, and was, consequently, not only
objectively bad but also morally wrong. Wollaston makes
the distinction but not as clearly as he might have done. He
should have emphasized the fact that in the ﬁrst instance
there was conformity of acts to the nature of things as they
were thought to be, while in the second instance the non-
conformity was in the face of known facts. He undoubtedly
intended for these two instances to show that immorality is
as self—contradictory as intellectual contradiction. “If he
in words had said that they were true or not true, he had
done no more than talk as if they were so; why then should
not to act as if they were true or not true, when they were
otherwise, contradict truth as much as to say they were so,
when they were not so.” 33 I think that Wollaston labors
unnecessarily hard to try to show that a truth can be denied
by actions as well as by words, unless he means thereby
more than the mere fact that there are signiﬁcant acts.

I think that these two illustrations answer the objection
that the intention of the actor has nothing to do with the
morality of the act. I think, however, that his lack of clar-
ity in distinguishing between the two types of actions was
responsible for the false interpretation. John Clarke, in

mJ. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 25.
" Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 31.
" Ibid., p. 9.

 

496 .The Ethics of William Wollaston

Wollaston’s lifetime, offered this criticism of his system.
John Clarke says that “actions whether words are deeds can-
not be properly said to deny or afﬁrm anything,” since
“afﬁrming and denying are actions” the terms are only “ap-
plicable to agents.” 3‘ Clarke says that the objection may
be made that this is a “nice distinction.” He answers that
“it is not more nice than necessary” because one cannot
afﬁrm or deny without an intention to do so. “A man is
then, and then only, said to afﬁrm or deny a thing when he
conveys a proposition in his own mind to the minds of others;
as expressing his own sense of apprehension or persuasion
of the agreement or disagreement of things.” 3“ Clarke says
that it matters not what meaning his words or actions may
“excite in the minds of those that bear the one, or see the
other” a man can only be said to afﬁrm or deny when he
intends to do so. He takes the case of “orders given in a
nation under the apprehension of an invasion from an ene-
my.” 3“ The order was “that beacons should be ﬁred, or
lights set up . . . to give warning of the enemy’s approac .”
The lighting of the beacons “would be equivalent to the
proposition, the enemy is come; and might be said thereby to
aﬂirm a truth, if the enemy was come, and a lie if he was
not, because this was really meant and intended.” But
suppose some one ignorant of the orders should ﬁre a bea-
con, “he could not be said thereby to ‘aﬂirm that the enemy
has come,’ notwithstanding their actions would necessarily
convey that proposition to the minds of such as, being ac-
quainted with the orders, should see the lights; and that for
this reason only, because he had not the least intention to
afﬁrm anything.” This is a case like the ﬁrst one mentioned
by Wollaston. It is illustrative of actions of the non-moral
type, illustrative of actions of the gesture or pantomime
variety which express only meaning. Wollaston is as equally
insistent as John Clarke that no moral quality attaches to
actions of this kind. Such evil as results from mistakes of
this kind does not constitute moral but only natural evil.

" J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Bell. of Nat. Dclin.,” p. 6. a
" Ibid., p. 9.
" Ibid., p. 10.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 47

So of course an innocent action cannot “deny” in the ethical
sense of the term.

Wollaston anticipates this objection when he says: “I
lay this down then as a fundamental maxim, that whoever
acts as if things were so, or not so, doth by his acts declare,
that they are so or not so; as plainly as he could by words,
and with more reality. And if things are otherwise, his acts
contradict those propositions, which assert them to be as
they are.” 37 Now John Clark argues that if one is mis-
taken he does not really act. He violates truth, he says,
but he does not act in any moral sense. He thinks that
Wollaston fails to make this all-important distinction. I
am very sure that he does make the distinction, for he says
that “No act of any being, to whom moral good and evil is
imputable, that interferes with any true proposition, or
denies anything to be as it is, can be right.” 33 And “to
whom” are “moral good: and evil . . . imputable?” This
he answers precisely as Clarke does; “That act, which may
be denominated morally good or evil, must be the act of a
being capable of distinguishing, choosing, and acting for
himself; . . . an intelligent and free agent. Because in
proper speaking no act at all can be ascribed to that which
is not indued with these capacities.” 3"

John Clarke thinks that the rightness or wrongness of
actions is determined by the intention of the actor and he
understands Wollaston to teach that “the immorality of the
action is exclusive of the intention,” that he who has no
intention to deny the truth is equally guilty with the one
who knows and intends to deny it.40 “If therefore nobody
can be said to afﬁrm or deny anything, without an intention
so to do, I doubt the greatest villains, will, according to
Mr. Wollaston’s doctrine, stand discharged from the guilt
of the greatest of crimes; since they are so far from intend-
ing the denial of any truth, any true proposition whatso-
ever, by the rapine and murder they are guilty of, that

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 13.

" Ibid., Prop. IV, p. 18.

" Ibid., Sec. 1, Intro., p. 6.

“J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 12.

 

498 The E thics of William Wollaston

they never so much as once imagine, their actions have
any such tendency, meaning or signiﬁcance at all.” ‘1 Clarke
must, I think, admit that the criminal is conscious of deny—
ing many signiﬁcant life relations. A villain who demands
a man’s money does not, he says, “intend thereby the denial
of any truth.” He says “the truth that the money belongs
to the traveller” is not, as Wollaston claims, “denied by such
an action.” The action has rather the contrary signﬁca-
tion.‘12 To be sure the very essence of wrong consists in
denying by actions, or “practically denying” that which
must be assented to intellectually. The trouble is Clarke
thinks that there is only one way to deny truth and strictly
speaking there is only one way, but treating things as they
are not denies by action that which must be assented to as
fact.

John Clarke next offers a dilemmatical argument against
Wollaston’s doctrine: “Take it which way you will, whether
an intention to deny the truth be made necessary or not
necessary to the immorality of an action, Mr. Wollaston’s
doctrine cannot stand. Upon the former supposition, the
greatest rogues will be excusable in the vilest of actions for
want of this intention to deny the truth, as it is very certain
that they have it not. . . . And upon the supposition that
an intent to deny truth is not necessary to the immorality
of an action, but that it is sufﬁcient to render an action
immoral, that it has a meaning inconsistent with some truth,
though the agent has not the least intention of denying any
truth; I say upon this supposition it will be a crime, and as
great a crime to deny the truth through ignorance, as to
do it wittingly and knowingly, with a perverse and malicious
intention.” 43 I would like to ask Clarke what the intention
of the rogue is if it is not to take something for his own
that belongs to some one else? The rogue, by his action,
does practically deny truth, for he denies things and rela-
tions to be as they are, and he intends to deny these essential
relations. Wollaston, as much as Clarke, believes that the

“J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 11.
“Ibid., p. 11.
‘3 Ibid., p. 13.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 499

morality of an action is dependent upon the intention of the
agent, in the sense that no act could be said to be good with-
out this good intention. His position is that all facts must
be considered and that an act is not really good, in the high-
est sense, unless the intention as well as the results are good.
Intentions as well as expected consequences must enter into
the motivation.“ This is not, however, inconsistent with an
objective conception of morality, for by the objectivity of
Ethics we only mean that the real natures of things deter-
mine what our intentions ought to be. The good man is one
who strives to conform to the nature of things.

That my interpretation of Wollaston is the correct one
is made even more evident by his third instance. In this
case a man promises that he will never do a thing and then
does it. The act, Wollaston says, interferes with his prom-
ise and is contrary to it, and is as contradictory as saying
that A made the promise and then straightway say that
he did not make it. True, the proposition is as much denied
by A’s behavior, as it would be by an actual verbal denial;
but that is very different from saying that, morally or
otherwise, they are the same kind of denials. If he thought
that they were the same, why should he, over and over again,
mention both kinds? He, clearly, it seems to me, means
that moral inconsistency is a form of inconsistency; but he
does not mean to identify it with the intellectual inconsis-
tency of self-contradictory propositions. “If then the be-
havior of A be inconsistent with the agreement mentioned in
the former proposition, that proposition is as much denied
by A’s behavior, as it can be by the latter, or any other
proposition. Or thus, if one proposition imports or con-
tains that which is contrary to what is contained in another,
it is said to contradict this other, and denies the existence
of what is contained in it. Just so if one act imports that
which is contrary to the import of another, it contradicts
this other and denies its existence. In a word A by his
actions denies the engagements to which he hath subjected
himself.” 45 Acts that do this, though, are not acts of the

“Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 15.
“Ibid., p. 11.

 

50 The Ethics of William Wollaston

gesture or pantomime variety which are but forms of lan-
guage; but are “such acts as constitute the character of a
man’s conduct in life” and have a mora “signiﬁcation.”
Wollaston says “In common speech we say some actions are
insigniﬁcant, which would not be sense, if there were not
some acts that are signiﬁcant, that have a tendency and a
meaning.” Acts, he is saying, have a signiﬁcance for life
and character, a moral signiﬁcation, as well as intellectual
signiﬁcance. True, he again uses an analogy to make clear
his meaning, and, as before, he succeeds in clouding up his
meaning instead of clearing it up. Actions, he says, are
signiﬁcant or insigniﬁcant; “And this is as much as can be
said of articulate sounds, that they are either signiﬁcant
or insigniﬁcant.” Just as some articulate sounds have sig-
niﬁcance and some have not, so of actions. He is, of course, '
using signiﬁcance in two very different senses,—moral and
intellectual.46

The failure of Wollaston to clearly differentiate between
moral and intellectual signiﬁcation constitutes the ground
of the criticism by John Clarke. He says that in regard to
this case of A making a promise to B not to do a thing, and
then doing it, there are ten equally possible signiﬁcations.
Suppose one of the signiﬁcations to be true, the rest would
of necessity all be false. Now, according to Wollaston’s
rule, thinks Clarke, the actions, however innocent, must be
condemned as immoral; because “no act that interferes with
any true proposition can be right” and this one “has so
many various meanings, all inconsistent with the truth.” ‘7
But none of the nine possible signiﬁcations, are, as a matter
of fact, true, so no action can be in violation of them.

I wish to mention one more of the illustrations of Wollas-
ton, because it is the original source of the most common
criticism against him, namely, that he reduces all immorality
to lying. Isaac told Abimelek that Rebekah was his sister,
but after this the king saw Isaac sporting and taking con-
jugal liberties with her. These acts, says Wollaston, denied
that she was his sister and afﬁrmed her to be either his wife

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 11.
" J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Bali. of Nat. Delin.,” pp. 27-30.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 51

or concubine. A man may so live that his “whole conduct
breathes untruth. May we not say” of such a man “that he
lives a lie?” Wollaston does not say, as his critics accuse
him of saying, that bad acts are just different ways of ly-
ing;—that would reduce all actions to the gesture and pan-
tomime type of actions. To act a lie means simply to be
false to signiﬁcant life relations and meanings, and certainly
this is what he means by saying “his whole conduct breathes
untruth” and “he lives a lie.” The immoral act in this case
was literal lying. Isaac, knowingly and deliberately, con-
fused ontological predicates in his statement to Abimelek
of the relations that obtained between Rebekah and him-
self.48

Wollaston recapitulates the argument of this division, and
this recapitulation might well serve as an epitome of his
analogous treatment of truth and goodness: “I lay this
down as a fundamental maxim, that whoever acts as if things
were so, or not so, doth by his acts declare that they are so
or not so; as plainly as he could by words, and with more
reality.” 49 Is not his meaning very clear? “As plainly”:
the contradiction is as evident, but not the same kind of
thing, for the one is logical and the other ethical in character.
He says “with more reality,” because intellectually speaking,
true pr0positions cannot be denied. Immoral acts do not
deny true propositions to be intellectually true, but they
do “practically” deny them to be true. In the practical
denial of that to which one intellectually assents consists
the inconsistency of immorality. The critics, from the time
of Garve and Clarke to the present, have interpreted this
passage as meaning that immoral acts are false judgments
in regard to the nature of things.50

IV

In this paragraph Wollaston deﬁnes morality negatively
by saying that contradictory acts cannot be right. “No

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 12.
" Ibid., p. 13.
" Ibid., p. 13.

 

52 The Ethics of William Wollaston

act of any being, to whom moral good or evil is imputable,
that interferes with any true proposition, or denies any-
thing to be as it is, can be right.” 51

1. Wollaston’s ﬁrst proof of this proposition is as fol-
lows: “If that proposition, which is false, be wrong, that
act which implies such a proposition, or is founded in it,
cannot be right; because it is the very proposition itself in
practice.” Mere propositions cannot be right or wrong,
if right and wrong are given an ethical connotation. Were
this sentence alone considered we might think that Wollaston
is using “wrong” with an ethical connotation, for he does
use “right” with an undoubted ethical connotation in the
same sentence. In the very next paragraph, however, he
makes it very clear that his use of the word “wrong” is not
moral but natural and intellectual. This constitutes his
second. John Clarke very properly takes Wollaston to task
for the two meanings given to “wrong.” He says “The
terms of right and wrong are not applicable to propositions
at all, in any moral sense. . . . Right and wrong are de-
nominations given to things, upon account of their agree-
ment or disagreement with some rule, to which they are re-
ferred, and by which they are judged of. Now, the only
rule to which propositions, considered as true or false, are
referred, and by which they are judged of, is the nature and
existence of things. Such propositions as are conformable
thereto may be, and are properly called ‘right,’ those that
are not, ‘wrong.’ ” 52 Clarke says that this means that
Wollaston’s proof will reduce to the “triﬂing” statement
“that the proposition which is false is false.” Wollaston had
set out to prove, “not that actions which imply denial of the
truth, cannot be declarative of the truth they deny, . . . but
that such actions are immoral.” 53

2. “Those propositions, which are true, and express
things as they are, express the relation between the subject
and the attribute as it is; that is, this is either afﬁrmed or
denied of that according to the nature of the relation.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 13.
"J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 37.
“Ibid., p. 39.

 

The Religion of N ature Delineated 53

And, further, this relation is determined and ﬁxed by the na-
tures of the things themselves.” In other words one cannot
deny such relations, as actually existent, and be considered
sane. Then follows the moral part of the argument: “There-
fore nothing can interfere with any proposition that is true,
but it must likewise interfere with nature, and consequently
be unnatural or wrong in nature.” 54 In criticising this
second proof that nothing can interfere with truth “but it
must likewise interfere with nature” and so be wrong, John
Clarke says, that “interfering with nature . . . can here
signify” only “false,” not moral “wrong.” So that Wol-
laston’s way of proving actions . . . that deny truth to be
immoral, . . . is but afﬁrming over and over again . . .
that actions that deny truth deny truth.55 I do not see the
special force of this objection, because saying that truth is
conformity to nature is saying something more than that
truth is truth. It is saying that truth is objective, and by
saying that morality is in conformity to nature or to truth
we are saying that morality is also objective.

3. For a third argument for his thesis that contradictory
acts cannot be right, he says, “if there is a Supreme Being,
upon whom the existence of the world depends,” then there
can be nothing in it but “what he causes”; then “to own
things to be as they are is to own what he causes; . . . and
this is to take things as he planned them in his constitution
of the world.” The duty of man consists in submitting to his
will “revealed in the book of nature.” The “owning of
things, in all our conduct, to be as they are, is obedience
. . . to the author of nature.” Wollaston’s conception of
the place of the will in morality is made quite evident here:
“The relation that lies between this and that is of such a
nature that one may be afﬁrmed of the other, this is true;
but yet to me it shall not be so; I will not act as if it were
so.” 5" Wollaston says that one can say for himself; I will
not follow the laws of nature, “even existence shall be non-
existence, when my pleasure requires. Such an impious

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 13. -

I"J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 39.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 14.

 

54 The Ethics of William Wollaston

declaration as this attends every voluntary infraction of
truth.” 5" What Wollaston is, here, saying, in effect, is
this “conformity to nature” is the standard of both truth
and goodness; but “to own things to be as they are” in our
thinking is necessitated, while the “owning of things, in all
our conduct, to be as they are” is a matter of freedom.
This constitutes the essential difference between intellectual
and moral relations. John Clarke’s criticism of this point
fails to take this into consideration. He thinks that every-
thing in the world is as God would have it be, failing to con-
sider the ill effects wrought by men through the mis—use of
their freedom. John Clarke says that for the rich to relieve
the poor is not “taking things as God has given them,” but
“altering things that God has caused or permitted to be.”
The neglect of the poor more truly “leaves things in the
condition he has caused or permitted to be, and which his
constitution of things suffered to remain unaltered.“3

4. The fourth argument for the thesis, that contradic-
tory acts cannot be right, is that things cannot be denied to
be what they are without contradicting axiomatic and eternal
truth, such as “everything is what it is.” Now there are
immutable truths, which have “always subsisted in the di-
vine mind,” the denial of these is a denial of God. The na—
ture of things cannot be denied existentially, but only mor-
ally. Intellectually we cannot deny the existence of things
to be as they are,-and morally things should be treated as
they are.

5. This fact is further emphasized: “Designedly to
treat things as being what they are not is the greatest pos-
sible absurdity.” To get Wollaston’s meaning we must get
the full force of the word “designedly.” The kind of con-
tradiction which immorality makes, is that of “designedly”
treating “things as What they are not.” This is contradic-
tory, because one must, at the same time, assent to the truth,
that is, admit things to be What they are. To act immorally
is to act inconsistently, or as Wollaston expresses it, “to
put bitter for sweet, darkness for light, crooked for straight.

'7 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 14:.
"J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 41.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 55

It is to subvert all science, to renounce all sense of truth,
and ﬂatly to deny the existence of anything. For nothing
can be true, nothing does exist, if things are not what they
are”; and he who acts immorally, thinks Wollaston, prac-
tically wills these contradictions an existence.“

John Clarke comments on the statement of Wollaston,
“that to treat things as not being what they are is to put
bitter for sweet, darkness for light, crooked for straight”
by saying that this is just stating “that the denial of truth
is the denial of truth.60 Clarke fails to consider that Wol-
laston is saying that these matters of fact cannot be denied,
“but that to treat things as not being what they are” is as
equally contradictory. He pretends to believe Wollaston
to teach that immoral men have actually denied these mat-
ters of fact. Wollaston means to say that to act immorally
is as contradictory as “to put bitter for sweet, etc. It is to
subvert all science, renounce all sense of truth, ﬂatly to deny
the existence of anything,” but this Clarke takes literally.
So he asks: “How has poor science done to subsist in the
world, under such terrible and furious assaults, from the
vices and follies 0f men F” “1 This criticism is based entirely
upon a confused interpretation. Leslie Stephen, laboring
under the same mis-interpretation says that Wollaston is
’ arguing the impossibility of immorality.62 Both men fail
to get the signiﬁcance of the difference between denying
truth and “practically” denying it. The truth of the matter
is that a man can, in practice, deny truth; but even while
so acting one gives his assent to the truth of the proposition
practically denied. The intellect is determined in its reac-
tions, the will is not, consequently immorality is not impos-
sible. So, in acts, one can deny what cannot be denied as
truth. The contradiction consists in afﬁrming and denying
at the same time; and this is what all immorality does, for
morality attaches only to intelligent and free acts.63

Wollaston ends this paragraph by an illustration of

a“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 15.

“J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 44.

“ Ibid., p. 45.

“L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., p. 7.

" 8. Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 188. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 14.

 

56 The Ethics of William Wollaston

“designedly treating things as being what they are not.”
In this example he makes very clear the diﬁ'erentia of immor—
ality. Immorality is as absurd, he says, as saying that
things that are are not, as absurd as saying that A is at
the same time both A and not-A. But Wollaston does not
say that all such practical denials of evident truth are
immoral, and not all practical afﬁrmations of evident truth
are moral. The ﬁrst sentence in the work of Wollaston
states that there are good, bad and indifferent acts of men.
These indifferent acts either conform to truth or conﬂict
with truth. Mere conformity to some truth, then, does not
make an act good. The mere violation of truth is not im-
moral. The nature and importance of the truths conformed
to or violated is an important factor in determining whether
an act has moral character or whether it is morally indiﬁ'er- '
ent. It is true that Wollaston does say that he would have
everything treated as what it is and that the thought of any
truth suffering violation is shocking to him, still he grants
that there are acts that are practically indifferent, morally
considered.“ “To talk to a post, or otherwise treat it as if
it was a man, would surely be reckoned an absurdity. Why?
because this is to treat it as being what it is not.” It is,
though, not immoral but only absurd to treat a post as a
man. The converse, that is to treating a man as a post,
constitutes immorality. He says “to treat a man as a post
should . . . be reckoned as bad,” because it practically
denies him to be a man and treats him “as if he had no sense
and felt no injuries, which he doth feel.” Treating a man
as a post is bad and not only absurd, because it is acting
towards him “as if to him pain and sorrow were not pain,
happiness not happiness. This is what the cruel and unjust
often do.” 65 It is quite certain that Wollaston does not
here confuse the intellectual and the moral relations, what-
ever he may do elsewhere. It is not immoral, but only ab-
surd, to treat a post with the same consideration with which
one would treat a man; but to treat a man as a post is a
very different kind of thing, for such treatment violates. the

“Wollaston, Reli. Nat. Delin., pp. 20 and 23.
“Ibid., p. 15.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 57

nature of humanity. The one is merely. acting incongru-
ously or absurdly. The other action is equally incongruous
and absurd, but since personality is the truth here violated
the act is also morally bad. This instance also meets the
criticism that Wollaston gives no consideration to feelings,
for the immorality of treating a man as a post he makes to
consist, largely, in the disregard of the man’s feelings.“

6. His last argument for the truth of his proposition is
as follows: “To deny things to be as they are is a trans-
gression of the great law of our nature, the law of reason.”
When we choose something contrary to truth, that is, make
a moral choice which contradicts the true nature of things
we thereby violate reason: “For truth cannot be opposed,
but reason must be violated.” Wollaston here, gives us his
idea of conscience: “If I may judge by what I feel within
myself, the least truth cannot be contradicted without much
reluctance; even to see others disregard it “does something
more than displease; it is shocking.” It violates the law of
our being, our rational nature.67

V

In this paragraph Wollaston says that truth is as much-
violated by sins of omission as by sins of commission. He
says that by omissions, or failing to act when one ought to
act, a true proposition is as much denied as by acts incon-
sistent with truth. In regard to these, however, he grants
that “much more latitude must be allowed, and much must
be allowed, and much must be left to every one’s own judg
ment and ingenuity.” There are many omissions “which are
manifestly inconsistent with some true proposition, these
must be wrong.” The violation of solemn promises, for
example, is a contradiction of truth. Then there is the sin
of having low ideals of life. This is wrong, because it is
“failing to have the life ends required by the nature of
things.” The failure to cultivate my mind is to “deny my
mind to be what it is and knowledge to be what it is.” This

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 15.
" Ibid., p. 15.

 

58 The Ethics of William Wollaston

principle does not mean, Wollaston says, that if I do not
always give to the poor I am acting wrongly. There are
times, he says, “when I might contradict truth by giving
to a poor man.” “8 Many things are to be considered before
we can pass a moral judgment in such cases. The existen-
tial judgment, this man is poor is true in every case; but
the moral judgment asserts, in addition, my relation to the
case and to the problem of poverty in general. If my cir-
cumstances are such that I can give something for charity
and I fail to do so, then do I “deny the condition of the poor
to be what it is and my own to be what it is.” “9 In a word,
according to Wollaston, an uncharitable being is immoral
in that he violates the real nature of things by not living
up to his real self in all his relations to other real things.
His general principle is that human beings are to always be
treated as human beings, and when they are otherwise
treated wrong is done them. Wollaston here comes rather
close to Utilitarianism, but his criterion is more inclusive
than that of the greatest happiness of the greatest number.

John Clarke says that in this case Wollaston “blundered
upon the manner of proof, commonly called petitio prin—
cipii,” not by saying that “the rich man’s neglect of the
poor” is “immoral, because it implies a denial of this truth,
that the rich are obliged to relieve the poor”; but on the
ground that he denied his condition and that of the poor to
be what they are. “The denial of property in the owner
did so visibly imply the supposition of a law of nature,
as the denial of obligation did.” Clarke says that the prin-
ciple of Wollaston would imply that the relief of the poor
by the rich was a denial that the circumstances “are what
they are,” namely, that he is rich and they poor.70 Clarke
says that, according to Wollaston, the rich ought not to
relieve the poor for that is denying the poor to be what they
are. The poor should be left in the circumstances. in which
God has seen ﬁt to place them.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 16.

“Ibid., p. 17.
" J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Reli. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 34.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 59

VI

In this paragraph Wollaston emphasizes the necessity of
considering all relations. The position is taken that a thing
must be considered in all its relations before we can know
what it is. The man who rides a stolen horse is acting in
conformity with the nature of the horse in riding him, but
in that the horse is stolen he violates the nature of the horse
as some one’s else property. Because each thing is several
things, in that it has many relations, and the same of each
and every person there are many conﬂicts of duties. “Here
the importance of the truth on the one and the other side
should be diligently compared. . . . In short, when things
are truly estimated, persons concerned, times, places, ends
intended, and effects that naturally follow, must be added
to them.” 71 So it is all a matter of judgment, existential
and value. In many life situations one does not know enough
to act intelligently, and how is one to act morally without
acting intelligently? One may say that, in such cases, con-
science bids one be true to himself, but when this is given
content it can only mean being true to one’s relations. The
signiﬁcant thing to me is that Wollaston gives due place
to both and rightly relates the a priori and the a posteriori
elements in knowledge and in morality. Prior to all experi-
ence we can say that a man ought to conform his life to
the nature of things, and it is only experience that can tell
him what these are. There is an absoluteness and a rela-
tiveness about it. The form of morality is a priori and
absolute; it is that there should be conformity of life,
through freely willed acts, to reality. The content of
morality is relative and a posteriori involving judgment both
of the facts and of duty in respect to the facts: “Nothing
can be true any further than it is compatible with other
things that are true.” 72

Erdmann in commenting on this passage says that it is
Wollaston’s idea that every object must be judged, not in

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 18 and 20.
"Ibid., p. 19.

 

60 The Ethics of William Wollaston

isolation, for this would give only a one-sided judgment;
but “a person must consider, at the same time, all its rela-
tions and must consider it in its totality. Otherwise we
are not taking it as it is but only as it is partly and partly
as it is not.” 73 He says that this is of the very greatest
importance in evaluating an action and refers to Wollas-
ton’s own case of riding a horse which belongs to some
one else. One’s action is in conformity to the nature of
things when the horse is considered only as a horse, but
when the horse is considered as being a piece of property
belonging to some one else then the action is seen to be in
contradiction to the nature of things. Erdmann says that
a proposition is true only when it considers a thing in its
totality, “hence only that is really true which is in accord
with the nature of the object and to act in accord with its
nature is acting according to truth, that is, good (nur das
ist wirklich wahr, was der Natur des Gegenstandes gamiiss
ist, und seiner Natur gemiiss ihn zu behandeln, ist der Wahrh
heit gemass, d,h. gut).” 7‘

VII'

In this paragraph Wollaston merely says that it is right
not to do wrong: “When any act would be wrong, the for-
bearing that act must be right; likewise when the omission
of anything would be wrong, the doing of it must be right.
Because contrariorum contraria est ratio.” 75

VIII

This proposition afﬁrms the coincidence of good and right
and of evil and wrong: “Moral good and evil are coincident
with right and wrong. For that cannot be good, which is
wrong; nor that evil, which is right.” 76 The truth of this
is not so apparent as would seem to be the case nor is it a

"' Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 116.
“ Ibid., p. 116.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

" Ibid., p. 19.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 61

mere tautological statement. Right and wrong refer to
the conformity of acts to the moral law, while good and evil
refer to the conformity of acts to the nature of things.

IX

In this paragraph Wollaston takes the position that there
are degrees of good and evil and undertakes to reconcile
this with the position that morality consists in acts that
are conformable to truth. “Every act” of an intelligent
free being and “all those omissions which interfere with
truth . . . are evil in some degree or other.” When he
speaks of acts inconsistent with truth, he says, “I mean any
truth, any true proposition, whether containing matter of
speculation or plain fact. I would have everything taken
to be what in fact and truth it is.” Here Wollaston does
identify truth and goodness, and gives ground for the
criticism that he reduces all immorality to lying. But this
passage must not be taken alone, and it must also be borne
in mind that he is here discussing degrees of immorality.
He can well say that every violation of truth is to some
extent evil. He would say, I am sure, that even his rela-
tively innocent case of a man speaking to a post is, to an
extent, a violation of the nature of personality, in that
the man who does that kind of thing is acting absurdly and
is consequently not treating himself as a rational creature,
and so the act is evil. He goes on to say, however, that
“neither all evil nor all good actions are equal.” 77 It might
be argued that to‘ make any diﬂ'erence in degrees of morality
he must resort to another standard than that of conformity
to truth. He says that the importance of the truth re-
spected or violated determines the degree of virtue or vice.
“For neither all evil nor all good actions are equal. Those
truths which they respect, though they are equally true,
may comprise matters of very diﬂ'erent importance; or
more truths may be violated one way than another, and
acts committed by the violation of them may be equally
said to be crimes but not equal crimes.” In his example,

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 22.

 

62 The Ethics of William Wollaston

however, he apparently resorts to the hedonistic criterion.
He says that it is far worse to deprive a man of an estate
than it is to steal a book from him, because the one is worth;
far more than the other, which means that the one “is
capable of conferring more happiness than the other.” 78
One year after the death of Wollaston, Thomas Bott
wrote a pamphlet criticizing his ethical philosophy. Bott
conﬁnes his criticism almost entirely to this paragraph,
which is perhaps the weakest, or, at least the one most open
to misinterpretation, of any in the entire argument. Bott
says: “What I design is to conﬁne myself to the peculiar
and principal notion of our author; and enquire whether
it is right, or not. ,His notion of morality we have in his
IX. Proposition where he makes the formal ratio of moral
good and evil to consist in an agreement or disagreement
with truth: and by truth, he immediately tells us, he means
any truth whatever; any true proposition whatsoever,
whether containing matter of speculation, or plain fact.” 7’
I do not think it at all fair to say that this passage really
gives the clearest statement of the ethical principle of
Wollaston, for he is here concerned more with the question
of the degrees of good and evil than with that of determin—
ing the criterion of morality. The criterion is, of course,
used in determining the degrees of good and evil; but since
he is more concerned with the determination of the degrees
than with stating the differentia of good and evil, he is not
as careful in that regard as he is elsewhere. The thing in
this passage, that makes Wollaston more open to criticism
here than in any place else, is that he does apparently
identify intellectual and moral relations. But, it must be
remembered, that he has labored to make clear that there
is not only truth of propositions but also truth of actions.
His position is that all truth should be respected and that
it is, to some extent, wrong to violate any truth. “I would
have everything taken to be what in fact and truth it is.” 8°
We are told by Wollaston’s biographer that he had such a

" Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 23.

7' Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refutcd, p. 5.
'° Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 20.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 65

passion for accuracy that he destroyed many manuscripts
of his because he was not satisﬁed with them. A man can
have a scientist’s passion for truth, and at the same time
grant that there is a great difference in the importance of
purely academic speculative truth and that which more
directly concerns human hapiness and human welfare. The
thing that Wollaston is here insisting upon is that all truth
should be respected and that it is wrong to violate any
truth, however theoretical it may be in interest and' in im—
portance. It is of course far more important that he be
true to human life and to truth directly concerned there-
with. So instead of Wollaston giving up absolutely the
distinction between truth and goodness, as Bott accuses
him of doing, he really draws up a hierarchy of vices and
virtues. By the principle of concomitant variation it may
be shown that his moral criterion is that of truth to human
happiness and welfare, for while all truth should be re-
spected and while it is wrong to violate any truth there are
degrees of good and evil. And the degree of good or evil
is to be determined, not by its degree of conformability to
abstract truth but by the importance of the truth conformed
to or violated; and that which determines the importance
of the truth is its relations to human, life and to human
happiness.81

Bott. is insistent upon the point that 'in this passage is
to be'found Wollaston’s “principal and peculiar notion of
morality. And it is,” he says, “visible on every page, how
much he endeavors to carry this notion through the whole
book, and make it agree to, or comprehend all virtues and
vices whatsoever.” He says that “as far as page 138 we
ﬁnd him proving T guilty of immorality, by taking from
P something that was P’s; because by such an act, T de-
clared that to be his own, and so acted a lie; in which, as
he adds, consists theidea and formal ratio of moral evil.
Indeed this is the peculiar notion of the book.” 82 It is
very difﬁcult to see how Bott can think that Wollaston con-

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 20 and 38-40.
“ Ibid., p. 138. Bott, “Bell. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Re-
futed, p. 5. ‘

 

64 The Ethics of William Wollaston

fuses ethical and logical relations in the case mentioned. He
states that, according to Wollaston’s principle, “T was
guilty of immorality” because he treated P’s property as
if it were his own “and so acted a lie.” To say that im-
morality consists in acting a lie is no confusion of intel-
lectual and moral relations. It is very clearly implied that
the one belongs to the world of knowledge and the other
to the realm of action. But Bott thinks that the two are
hopelessly confused for he says: “I think his notion of
moral good and evil make all truth not only moral, but
equally so; or, in other words, all truths are in themselves
of equal importance, according to his deﬁnition; and the
agreement or disagreement of our actions with them, equally
moral or immoral.” 83 Bott certainly must have read the
passage very carelessly for it states very clearly that
“neither all evil nor all good actions are equal. Those
truths which they respect, though they are equally true,
may comprise matters of very diﬂ‘erent importance.” 8‘
He makes it very clear also that he has in mind not formal
truth but true life relations. As I have just said, Wollaston
grants that all truths are moral, in some degree, in that
truths of every kind should be respected; but it cannot be
said that truths are considered by him to be of equal im-
portance.85

In spite of the fact that Wollaston makes it very clear
that morality is concerned only with actions, Bott insists
that he makes morality to depend upon the truth or falsity
of some pr0position. He goes further and says “if the
moral goodness or evil of actions consists in their agree-
ment or disagreement with truth,” then “where there is this
agreement or disagreement, there is moral good or evil, let
the truth respected be what it will.” 8‘ This, as we have
seen, Wollaston grants. Mathematical truths of an abso-
lutely abstract nature should be respected, not alone be-
cause of “the respect they bear to human beings” for mathe-

" Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 9.

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 20.

" Ibid., p. 23.

" Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refuted, pp. 8-9.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 65

matical truths often come to have very close relations to
human welfare, but also because “the least truth cannot be
contradicted without much reluctance.” 87 Wollaston, how—
ever, is very far from saying that it follows from this that,
morally speaking, “whatever actions have an equal agree-
ment or disagreement” with truth are “equally good or
evil.” 88 In fact he denies this absolutely. He says, “that
though to act against truth in any case is wrong, yet, the
degrees of guilt vary with the importance of the things.”
In some cases the sin is great and in others it amounts to
“almost nothing.” Inanimate things, for example, Wollas—
ton thinks, cannot be “considered as capable of wrong treat-
ment, if the respect they bear to living beings is separated
from them.” 89

Bott grants that “the author often speaks of truths of
importance, or weight, etc., and so may be supposed to guard
against any such objection as this.” Bott thinks, however,
that he fails to guard against the objection because he did
not put any such word in “his deﬁnition of moral good and
evil, and seems only incidentally to talk of the different im-
portance of truths, 'when he is as it were forced to it by the
cases that are put; and to which no tolerable answer could
be given, without allowing such difference.” 90 In reply, I
will say, that in the very passage that Bott is considering
Wollaston does say that: “Every act . . . which interferes
with truth . . . is morally evil, in some degree or other.”
He also says that “neither all good, nor all evil actions are
equal,” because the “truths which they respect, though they
are equally true, may comprise matters of very different
importance.” 91 I grant that Wollaston does not, in this
particular passage, state that it is the relation to human
happiness and welfare that constitutes the standard by
which the importance of a‘ truth is determined, until he
takes up particular cases. He does state in the proposi-
tion itself that there are truths of very diﬂ'erent impor-

"' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 16 and 31.

” Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 9.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 31.

'° Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 10.
'1 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 90.

 

66 The Ethics of William Wollaston

tance, and, of course, this could only be a diﬁ'erence of '
importance for human lives, otherwise importance could
have no moral connotation. Incidentally, it may be said,
that Bott’s criticism here is quite inconsistent with his other
criticism of Wollaston, which is considered at length in the
section on happiness, namely, that Wollaston makes the
importance of truths to depend upon their relation to the
production of human happiness.92

X

In this paragraph Wollaston takes up at length the thesis
stated in his introductory sentence. He there said: “The
foundation of religion lies in that difference between the acts
of men, which distinguish them into good, evil and indif-
ferent.” He thinks that he has proved that there is moral
good and evil, consequently he afﬁrms that there is Natural
Religion. His position is somewhat different from that of
Kant; both rest religion on morality, but Kant bases moral-
ity on a categorical imperative, an immediate and indubitable
inner command, while Wollaston bases morality on the
nature of things. I think that this objection might be made
to the position of Wollaston on this point: Religion and
morality are both rational and are demanded by the nature
of things, so religion cannot be said to rest on morality.
It is true that morality implicates religion, but religion just
as truly implicates morality. They are in fact but the ﬁnite
and the inﬁnite aspects of one Weltauschauung, and this is
really but Wollaston’s way of relating them. By religion
he means nothing else, he says, “but an obligation to do
what ought not to be omitted, and to forbear what ought
not to be done,” which obligations are determined by the
real natures of things due to their cosmic relations. Re-
ligion “follows from the distinction between moral good
and evil,” which distinction is “founded in the respect which
men’s acts bear to truth.” Truth can only be conformity
to the real and ultimate natures of things, and since there
are ultimate life relations based on the real nature of things

“Bott, “Reli. of Nature Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 6.

 

The Religion of Nature Delineated 67

there is religion. This is natural religion based not on reve-
lation but on the uninspired reason. Religion rests on the
necessary distinction between good and evil, and this dis-
tinction “is founded in the respect, which men’s acts bear
to truth.” Truth, in turn, depends upon the real nature
of things “since no proposition can be true, which expresses
things otherwise, than as they are in nature.” Both morality
and religion are objective, their nature being determined by
the real nature of things, by reality.93

XI

This paragraph epitomizes the argument of the entire
section by stating the rationale of Natural Religion. The
one great law of Natural Religion is: “That every intelli-
gent, active, and free being should so behave himself, as by
no act to contradict truth; or that he should treat every-
thing as being what it is.” 94 But this is also the law of
morality. Natural Religion, then, teaches that man should
be treated as being what he is and God as what he is.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 24.
" Ibid., p. 94.

 

WOLLASTON’S CRITICAL INTERPRETATION
OF OTHER SYSTEMS

After stating his own view of Ethics Wollaston under-
takes to offer a critical evaluation of the typical ethical
theories. He says that “our main subject of study is the
distinction between moral good and evil.” The existence
of any such distinction, he says, “some have been so wild
as to deny.” He thinks from what he has said already it
is quite evident “that there is as certainly moral good and
evil as there is true and false, and that there is as natural
and immutable a difference “between the one as between the
other.” He then proceeds to pass judgment on the various
ways of ﬁnding the diﬁerentia of moral good and evil.1

“They who place all in following nature, if they mean
by that phrase acting according to the natures of things,
or according to truth, say what is right. But this does
not seem_ to be their meaning. And if it is only that a man
must follow his own nature, since his nature is not purely
rational, but there is a great part of him, which he has in
common with the brutes, they appoint him a guide which
I fear will mislead him, this being commonly more likely to
prevail than the rational part. At best this is loose talk.” 2
In the section on happiness this question of what is meant
by a life conformable to nature is treated more completely.
It is very clear, however, that he is not in agreement with
those who interpret the formula “according to nature”
hedonistically. If one means by a life “according to nature”
a life lived conformany to the real and ultimate nature of
things, or according to reason’s dictates, then does Wollas-
ton ﬁnd himself in agreement, otherwise not.

“They who make right reason to be the law, by which

1 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 22.

'Ibid., p. 23.

68

 

 

Wollaston’: Critical Interpretation of Systems 69

our acts are to be judged, and according to their conform-
ity to this or deﬂection from it call them lawful or unlawful,
good or bad, say something more particular and precise,”
than do the hedonists. Wollaston says that they are right
when they say that “whatever will bear to be tried by the
test of right reason, is right; and that which is condemned
’by it wrong.” He says that he agrees with them if by
“right reason they mean that which is found by the right
use of our rational faculties,” but he says that he is not
at all sure that this is what they mean.3 He is rather sure
that this is not their meaning, but that they think that
there is a special kind of reason which passes upon moral
matters. He would not agree to the intuitional conception
of the term “right reason,” for when so conceived “each
man has a different right reason, and each thinks that his
alone is right.” Wollaston says that there is only one kind
of reason and by “right reason” one must, to be true to
the facts, mean the “right use of our rational faculties.”
He does not think that man possesses a moral faculty but
that moral matters are decided by the ordinary reason. He
is very insistent upon the point that he will accept no
intuitive notion of “right reason.” He makes it very clear
that there are two factors involved in the criterion of
morality, the empirical and the rational, and also that
“rational” is not given an intuitional but a ratiocinative
connotation. He says: “And besides, what I have said,
extends further; for we are not only to respect those truths,
which we discover by reasoning, but even such matters of
fact, as are fairly discovered to us by our senses. We
ought to regard things as being what they are, which way
soever we come to the knowledge of them.” 4‘ As morality is
“made to consist in the conformity of men’s acts to the
truth of the case” we have a criterion which is “undeniable,
intelligible and practicable.”
Wollaston takes the same attitude towards those who
would make the criterion of morality a special sense or
innate idea. You cannot, he says, “deduce the difference

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 93.
‘ Ibid., p. 23.

 

515.693,..k, o

'70 Tbs Ethics of William Wollaston

between good and evil from the common sense of mankind,
and certain principles born with us. . . . For it is much
to be suspected there are no such innate maxims as they
pretend, but that the impressions of education are mis-
taken for them; and besides that, the sentiments of man-
kind are not so uniform and constant, as that. we may safely
thrust such an important distinction upon them.”5 So
Wollaston very distinctly denies that he is an intuitionist
or an intuitionalist. He believes neither in a special moral
faculty nor in innate moral ideas nor in a moral sense, yet,
as we shall see, critic after critic has identiﬁed his position
with that of Intuitionism.

It has been very common to identify the intellectualists
and the intuitionalists in morals, and historically they have
been associated together, because they have both been op-
posed to the sensationalists. The two positions are really
very different, and Wollaston is careful to deny the identity
of his position and that of Intuitionalism. He says that
one cannot know immediately and indubitably what he
should do in any life situation, but that this can be known
only after one has thought of the relations and meanings
of things. It is true that the intellectualists presuppose
a common rational nature, but the advantage of this over
the idea of a moral faculty is that all human conduct can
be evaluated by a common standard, that of ‘inherent
rationality. “The eternal rule of morality is that of right
reason. This is the Law of Nature which is of universal
extent, and everlasting duration.” It is founded in the
nature and reason of things, and is of the same original
with the eternal,reason of things. Its obligations “were
from eternity, and the force of it reaches throughout the
universe.” To this “Law of Nature” the reason of all men
everywhere naturally and necessarily assents.8 As con-
trasted to the standard of rationalism the criterion of the
intuitionist or intuitionalist is private, personal and peculiar,
and be it ever so indubitable it is nevertheless unintelligible.
The criterion of the intellectualists is that of truth, the

‘ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delim, p. 24. Clarke, Nat. Reli. IV. 5.
' Ibid.. p. 24.

 

.Wollaston’s Critical Interpretation of Systems 71

principal of constancy in the meanings of all minds and
the practical conformity in all living to these universal
meanings. Perhaps the difference between the two views
can be even more clearly drawn by simply characterizing
the one as subjective and the other as ob ective.

Wollaston ends this section of his treatment by criticizing
the systems of Plato and Aristotle. The latter on the
ground that the Golden Mean is often “difﬁcult to discern,”
and also on the ground that “there are several obligations
that can by no means be derived from it.” With Plato he
agrees that virtue “consists in such a likeness to God as we
are capable of,” but he criticizes Plato on the ground that
he does not tell us “by what means we may attain this like-
ness.” He says that Plato’s view must really be the same
as his own for we must understand by living in “likeness
to God” nothing other than “the practice of truth, God
being truth, and doing nothing contrary to it.” 7

Wollaston says that there are many other foundations
upon which morality has been built, but says that he ques-
tions whether any of them will hold any better than the ones
he mentions. He is skeptical of all subjective principles
and insists that the standard of morality must be an ob-
jective one. He says: “But  the formal ratio of moral
good and evil be made to consist in a conformity of men’s
acts to the truth of the ease or the contrary, as I have here
explained it, the distinction seems to be settled in a manner
undeniable, intelligible, practicable. For as what is meant
by a true proposition and matter of fact is perfectly under-
stood by everybody; so will it be easy for any one, so far
as he knows any true propositions and facts, to compare
not only words but also actions with them.” 8 He says that
things themselves must be our standard, that We must con-
stantly conform our thoughts and lives to the real natures
of things. Any system of morals is true to the extent that
it is based on nature, understanding by nature the true
nature and relations of things.

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 24.
' Ibid., p. 24.

 

(an 2-“ 1-4.2; ‘4 A

WOLLASTON DEALS WITH POSSIBLE OBJEC-
TION S TO HIS PRINCIPLE

Wollaston, before ending the section on “Moral Good and
Evil,” takes up certain objections that may be offered to
his principle of determining moral relations.

1. “If everything must be treated as being what it is” it
naturally follows that “to treat my enemy as such is to kill
him, or revenge myself soundly upon him.” Not so, Wollas-
ton answers, because my enemy /is something more than my
enemy, and I must consider him, not only as an enemy, but
also as a human being who is due the treatment properly
due a person. If all truth is to be observed my enemy must
be treated not only as my enemy but also as a man and a
citizen. I must, consequently, prosecute him in such a way
as to be true to all these relations. It is quite evident that
the taking of the law into my own hands would not do this.” 1

2. “To use a creditor, who is a spendthrift, or one that
knows not the use of money, or has no occasion for it, as
such, is not to pay him.” Wollaston answers this objection
by saying that to act in such a way is to make oneself “the
judge of his creditor, which is what he is not.” To act in
such a way would be to “arrogate to himself more than can
be true,” for he cannot know all the present and future
circumstances of his creditor. Wollaston says that to pay
a man what is due him does not deny “that he who pays
may think him extravagant.” The only signiﬁcance the act
of paying a debt to a spendthrift has, says Wollaston, is
“that he who pays thinks it due to the other.” 2 John Clarke
accused Wollaston of the fallacy of Begging the Question
in his manner of dealing with this supposed objection. He
says that Wollaston presupposes the idea of property, when

1 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 95 and 27.

' Ibid., pp. 25 and 28.

72

 

Wollaston Deals with Objections to Hi: Principle 78

he says that the debtor’s act “directly denies the money
which is the creditor’s to be the creditor’s.” He says that
Wollaston has no right to take for granted that which he
designs to prove. “Since property is founded in the law
of nature, . . . to suppose property, is to suppose that
there is a law of, nature, the very thing in question, and
which is the business and design of this section to prove.” 3
Clarke grants that this is not an obvious petitio principii.
It is not the same as saying the obvious thing that im-
morality is a denial of the law of nature—or the religion of
nature.‘

Bott undertakes to criticize Wollaston’s answer by ask-
ing “is it to be considered above all, or is it the principal
circumstances in the debtor’s guilt, that, by refusing to pay
his debts, he denies that to be his creditor’s, which really is
his?” Bott denies that this is the case. He is insistent
that immorality does not consist in such denials. The thing
“to be considered above all, .. . . when one man bastinadoes
another to death,” is not that by such an act “he denies
him to be a man, or to have a sense of feelings; or, in other
words, asserts him to be a post.”5 I am very sure that
Wollaston would agree entirely with the position taken by
Bott, in another passage, that the immoral act implies the
truth of the facts in the case and so cannot consist in a
denial of the truth.6 Bott simply falls into the common
mistake of failing to distinguish between the truth of acts
and that of the propositions. One can act contrary to
truth.7 .

3. In Wollaston’s third instance, he asks, “If I want
money do I not act according to truth, if I take it from
somebody else to supply my wants?” Is that not treating
my want as what it is and money as what it is? If I act in
any other way “do I not act contrary to truth?” He an-
swers saying: “Acting according to truth, as the phrase
is used in the objection, is not the thing required by my

'J. Clarke, Exam. of the “Bell. of Nat. Delin.,” p. 31.

‘ Ibid., p. 33. .

‘ Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted. p. 16.
' Ibid., p. 5.

" Ibid., p. 7.

 

'74 The Ethics of William Wollaston

rule; but, so to act that no truth may be denied by any
act.” 3 Bott intends to answer this objection but it is quite
evident that he has it confused with one of Wollaston’s
illustrations. This case is concerned with the taking of
money to satisfy my wants, whereas the other dealt with
the case of giving to the poor. Bott evidently has the lat-
ter in mind when he asks: “Who would have expected that
such a man, as our author appears to be, should be capable
of telling a poor wretch, just upon the point of starving,
that if he cannot get relief in any honest way, he must take
it as his fate. This, forsooth, because truth is truth; That
is though, such a poor creature sees at his feet a penny loaf
of his neighbor’s, which his neighbor does not want, he must
by no means touch it, because it is his neighbor’s and not
his own.” 9 ‘

Bott thinks that Wollaston takes an extreme position in
regard to the reverence he says men should have for the
truth. I do not think that this is the case. Wollaston
thinks that formal truth should be respected, but that there
are occasions for such violations when it is necessary to
the realization of a higher truth. Wollaston takes the posi-
tion that there‘are almost always ways of supplying one’s
needs without the violation of truth. He says that “the
man may by honest labor and industry seek to supply his
wants; or he may apply as a supplicant not as an enemy
or robber, to such as can afford to relieve him.” He does
say that “if there is no way in the world, by which he may
help himself without the violation of truth he must take it
as his fate. Truth will be truth, and must retain its char-
acter and force, let the case be what it will.” 1° I under-
stand him to say that one should not do a criminal thing
even in a critical situation. He does not say that no truth
whatever should be violated even to further a higher truth.
as Bott accuses.11 Granting that Wollaston goes too far,
in this case, I do not see that that constitutes an objection

aWollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 25 and 27. .

° Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 17.
1°Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 19 and 28.

’1 Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 8.

 

Wollaston Deals with Objections to His Principle 75

to his criterion of morality. There are occasions when truth
should be violated for the sake of humanity, but this does
not imply a principle other than that of truth. It only
insists that there is higher and lower truth and that the lower
should be sacriﬁced for the higher when they come into con-
ﬂict. In fact it is the idea of truth to humanity that makes
Bott reject Wollaston’s statement in this case. He is using
the criterion of truth when he in effect insists that the all-
important truth is that men must always be treated as men.
Wollaston says that there are degrees of good and evil. He
admits that truth concerning humanity is the all-important
truth}2

4. “If one, who plainly appears to have a design of
killing a man or doing him mischief, if he can ﬁnd him, should
ask me where he is, and I know where he is; may not I, to
save a life, say I do not know, though that be false?” Wol-
laston says that this is a very unusual situation. He says
that “It is certain . . . that nothing may willingly be done,
which in any manner promotes murder” for to be “accessory”
to murder “oﬁ'ends against many truths of great weight.”
It may be possible, however, to give an evasive answer or to
give an answer verbally false.13 Bott criticizes Wollaston
on the ground that he does not justify a lie in even such an
extreme case as this. I do not understand Wollaston to take
suchan extreme position. True, he insists, that “truth is
sacred,” but he also says that a denial “by words” is not as
bad as to deny truth “by facts.” He also says “all sins
against truth are not equal, and certainly a little trespassing
upon it in the present case, for the good of all parties,” is to
be justified.14 Bott thinks that Wollaston teaches that one
should not tell a lie even to save a life because “truth is
sacred.” He asks “Would not one think that the man’s life
was much more sacred than such a truth as this? And who
would not think that such a fellow, as should either by say-
ing Yes, or by being silent, expose his neighbor to the knife

1' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 15.

” Ibid., p. 27. -

“ Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 19. Wol-
laston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 97.

 

76 The Ethics of William Wollaston

of a villain, greatly deserved, nothwithstanding all his
scruples, an equal punishment with the ruﬂian himself.”
Bott thinks that Wollaston “contradicts himself, by his
notable distinction between denying truth by words, and by
facts, and making the latter much more criminal.” 15 I do
not think that this is true for Wollaston simply means to
say that all truth should be respected, and when one is
forced by the exigencies of the situation to violate some
truth, the violation of a merely verbal truth is less contra-
dictory than the violation of truth by actions. Anyway,
Bott’s criticism on this point is very inconsistent, for he had
criticized Wollaston on the score that he did not distinguish
between formal truth and truth that involves human lives.
He is, now, criticizing him on the ground that he does make
that distinction, for that is really the essential difference,
morally speaking, between denying truth by words and
denying truth by facts.m Wollaston says that all circum-
stances should be considered and he says also that there are
degrees of good and evil." Bott is not able to properly
appreciate Wollaston, due to the fact that he thinks that
his system is based on an identiﬁcation of the intellectual
and the moral. This is made evident by this quotation:
“For wherein is the guilt of a wicked deed? has it not been
deﬁned to lie in denying a truth? and is there not as much
of this in a verbal falsehood? When therefore the same truth
is equally affected both ways, sure the guilt is the same, or
equal.” 18

5. Wollaston’s last case is this: If a man in a frolic
breaks a glass he uses it as that which it is not, and so his
act is immoral. Does this not pay too much respect to an
inanimate object? the supposed objector asks. Wollaston
says that of course a drinking glass could not be considered
as such, or to be what it is, if there were no men to drink
out of them. To wantonly break a glass is wrong, because
of the use to which a glass can be put and its consequent

” Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 20.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

1' Ibid., p. 98.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 15. Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.”
Considered and Refuted, p. 91.

 

Wollaston Deals with Objections to His Principle 7'7

value to men. So it is the relation to persons that consti-
tutes the moral relation. Wollaston says that “all sins
against truth are not equal,” but must they not be accord-
ing to the criterion of truth? He answers that “the degrees
of truth vary with the importance of things.” 19 Again, he
says, “inanimate beings cannot be considered capable of
wrong treatment, if the respect they bear to living things
is separated from them.” Perhaps here as strongly as
anywhere Wollaston states just what kind of relations con-
stitute moral relations. He says, in effect, that those situ-
ations are moral situations where human beings are involved.
“When we compute what things are, we must take them as
being what they are in reference to things that have life”
and most of all to men.20

1’Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 30.
’° Ibid., p. 31.

 

GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF SECTION I

I. Morality Treated as Analogous to Truth

In this section Wollaston undertakes to delineate the na-
ture of goodness by comparing it with tﬁuth. I wish to
prove that he did not identify goodness and truth, but that
he merely compared the one with the other in order torex-
plicate the nature of goodness. The very use of the term
“delineated” in the title of Wollaston’s book is indicative
of the analogous method which he employs. Reasoning by
analogy was a favorite method in the Eighteenth Century.
Religion and morality were both treated in that way by many
writers. Wollaston took the position that the difference
between good and bad is as immutable as that between true
and false. He goes further and says that the difference is
at bottom the same, but this does not mean that he identi-
ﬁes them. What he means is that both are in true confor-
mity to things as they are, not that a moral act, or a value
judgment, is an existential judgment, A is A, but that
every one ought to treat A as A. He does not confuse the
matter at all, for he makes good “to consist in a conformity
of men’s acts to the truth of the case, . . . evil the con-
trary.” 1 Wollaston thinks that the nature of truth is .
better understood than the nature of goodness, so tries
to delineate goodness in terms of truth.

Wollaston takes the position that acting according to the
nature of things as the moral principle is as self-evident as
the law of identity. This, Sidgwick says, leads Wollaston to
state his four chief rules of righteousness, all of which are
as self-evident as the general principle on which they depend.
These four moral rules are: “Piety towards God, Equity
and Benevolence towards our fellows, and Sobriety towards

’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

78

 

General Interpretation of Section I '79

our own self.”_ This does not mean that the relations must
be always the same, but it does mean that when they are so
and so a very deﬁnite moral obligation necessarily follows,
and so morality is immutable. Sidgwick grants that Wollas-
ton merely works out an analogy between goodness and
truth, but still he says that the analogy is pressed so far
that “the essential distinction between what is and what
ought to be is lost.” 2 It is very difﬁcult to see how an
analogy could be pressed so far as to confuse goodness and
truth. The two could be confused only by failing to consider
that the method used was that of analogy.

Saying that moral relations are as true as logical relations
is very far from the identiﬁcation of the two, because while
we cannot withhold our assent to speculative truth, “we can
refuse to act up to a plain moral truth.” 3 Selby-Bigge
very properly suggests that Wollaston’s meaning is that
“practical truth is a metaphorical phrase and that the prac-
tical absurdity of refusing to perform the appropriate act
cannot be a formal fallacy.” 4 Clarke had used this same
method: “The reason which obliges every man in practice _
so to deal with another as he would expect that others
should deal with him, is the very same as that forces him in
speculation to afﬁrm that if one line or number be equal to
another, that other is reciprocally equal to it.” 5 This can
only mean that the same reason that pronounces material
absurdity to be such, also pronounces moral absurdity to be
such. It cannot mean that material absurdity can be a test
of morality, but only an analogy of it. Hobbes had used
this analogous argument for the obligation of justice. In-
justice, he says, is as if a man should deny in the end what
he had declared in the beginning.6 Williams very properly
speaks of the relation of ethics to mathematics and logic as
“an analogy and nothing more,” and yet he goes on to say
that the writers of this school allowed themselves to be mis-

‘Sidgwick, His. of Ethics, p. 182.
' Clarke, Nat. Reli., 4:4.

. ‘Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, p. XXXI.
'Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, 500.
‘ Hobbes, Leviathan, ch. XIV.

 

80 The Ethics of William Wollaston

led by the analogy and so failed to make the distinction
between what is and what ought to be.7

Another proof that Wollaston did not confuse or identify
goodness and truth, but only sought to explain goodness
by taking the position that morality and immorality are
analogous to truth and falsity in intellectual relations, is
the fact that Clarke’s method has been described as the
method of analogy. There is no diﬁ'erence in the two mor-
alists, in this respect, except that Clarke used the mathemati-
cal analogy while Wollaston used the analogy of logic and
physics. In the unsigned article in the Britannica on Clarke
the statement is made that “His theory of ﬁtness is formu-
lated on the analogy of mathematics. He held that in rela-
tion to the will things possess an objective ﬁtness similar to
the mutual consistency of things in the physical universe.
This ﬁtness God has given to actions, as He has given laws
to nature; and the ﬁtness is as immutable as the laws.” 8
The article states that Clarke’s theory has been criticized
~ on the ground that he “made virtue consist in conformity to
the relations of things universally.” In reply to these criti-
cisms, it is said, that “the whole tenor of his argument shows
him to have had in view conformity to such relations only as
belong to the sphere of moral agency.” The view is ex-
pressed that Clarke might have escaped this criticism if he
had emphasized more the relation of moral ﬁtness to the
will. I think that both Clarke and Wollaston did emphasize
sufﬁciently the relation of the will to morality, in fact they
made the difference between intellectual propositions and
moral acts to depend upon this. Moral relations are like
intellectual relations in the respect that both require con-
formity to the objective nature of things, but moral actions
are unlike intellectual judgments in that the former belong
to the world of freedom While the latter belong to the world
of description where relations are determined by the nature
of things. The article, however, does say that it is a mis-
take to say that “Clarke simply confused mathematics and

' Williams, Art. Ethics in Britannica.
' Anon., Art. Samuel Clarke in Britannica.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 81

morals by justifying the moral criterion on a mathematical
basis. . . . He compared the two subjects on the basis of
analogy.” 9

Williams, in his article on ethics in connection with the
exposition of the philosophy of Price, takes occasion to re-
mark that Clarke and Wollaston confused the ethical ques-
tion more than they explicated it by this use of the method
of analogy. Price, he says, regards moral ideas as derived
from the “intuition of truth or immediate discernment of
the nature of things by the understanding.” He regards
“right” and “wrong” as “single ideas incapable of deﬁnition
or analysis.” Williams says that Price conceives the notions
of “right,” “ﬁt,” “ought” as coincident and by so doing
“avoids.” Williams thinks, “the confusion into which Clarke
and Wollaston had been led by pressing the ‘analogy be-
tween ethical and physical truth!’ ” 1° As I have already
said I do not see how any confusion can result from pressing
an analogy, a confusion can only result from forgetting that
the relation between the good and the true is one of analogy.
As we shall see, presently, many of Wollaston’s critics fell
into confusion in their interpretations of his system on this
very point.

This analogous method of treating morals has been very
greatly misunderstood, and this misunderstanding has been
largely due to thefact that Wollaston’s critics have failed
absolutely to consider that his method was that of analogy.
Long ago Warlaw undertook to defend the principle of
Wollaston, or rather he was determined to see that he was
given a fair deal. Warlaw, as a matter of fact, dissents con-
siderably from this principle on the ground that it is entirely
too general, and also because he believes that Christian
ethics is the only adequate system. Sir James Mackintosh,
in criticizing the notion that a wicked act is as contradictory
as a logical or mathematical contradiction, said that as it is
impossible for 3 and 3 to be other than 6, it ought on this
ethical principle, “to be impossible to do a wicked act.” To

'Anon., Art. Samuel Clarke in Britannica.
1" Williams, Art. Ethics in Britannica, vol. IX, p. 833.

 

82 The Ethics of William Wollaston

act without the proper regard to the nature of things,
“as if a man were to use ﬁre for cooling, or ice for heating”
is absurd, but not immoral. Sir James goes on to say that
the murderer who poisons conforms to the nature of things
as much as does the physician who administers the emetic.
All men, whether they mean to do good or ill, must conform
to the nature of things.11 Warlaw answers, that when it is
said that an immoral act is as absurd as to deny obvious
logical or mathematical relations, the meaning, of course,
is “that the two are equally absurd in their respective depart-
ments, that the one is as preposterously contrary to the ﬁt-
ness of things, which constitutes the principles of morals, as
the other is to those mathematical relations which constitute
the principles of Geometry.” He continues, “does not the
very fact of his drawing a comparison, or borrowing an
analogy, from the one to the other, show, that he considered
the two descriptions of relations as essentially different,
and moral relations, though capable of such analogical il-
lustrations from logical or geometrical relations, as quite
distinct from, and not in any way affected by them?” Pre-
cisely the same is true of the physical relations like those re-
ferred to by Sir James. Warlaw says: “The fact that the
murderer and the physician act alike in conformity to such
relations for their respective ends, is so far from bringing
their respective actions in identity, or even alliance with
each other, that illustration of the position could have been
made as easily from physical as from mathematical or logi-
cal relations. One could say that the act of murder is as
absurd a thing in the department of morals, as, in the de-
partment of physics, would be the ‘choosing of ﬁre for cool-
ing or ice for heating’.” 12 Warlaw says that, of course,
“morality is not founded on relations universally and of
every sort, but only on those capable of such application,
relations involving persons.” No one, he says, could imagine
morality to attach to purely abstract things. Mackintosh
had said that “it seems evident, that no relations are to be

‘1 Mackintosh, Preliminary Dissertation.
1" Warlaw, Christian Ethics, p. 303. Mackintosh, Preliminary Disser-
tation. Wollaston, Reli. of Nature Deli., p. 15.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 83

considered, except those in which a living, intelligent and
voluntary agent is one of the beings related.” This Warlaw
says is precisely. the teachings of Wollaston, “it never oc-
curred to me, before reading Mackintosh, that this moral
principle had any reference to mathematical or logical ab-
stractions.” The system teaches that there ought to be a
conformity of actions to the nature of things, Warlaw
says, but not that morality consists in “relations which are
entirely extraneous to the department of moral agency, but
all the relations in which such agency is possible. On these
universally the general system of morals rests, and in con-
formity to these universally, virtue consists.” Wollaston
anticipated just such objections as those offered by Sir
James Mackintosh, and his answers were very similar to
those offered by Warlaw.13

Some of the moralists who interpret Wollaston’s system
idealistically see in his analogical method a profound meta-
physical signiﬁcance. It is said that such an analogy be-
tween the good and the true can be found only because of the
ultimate coincidence of the two.“ I think that this is true
but we do not want to interpret this in such a way as to make
Wollaston confuse logical and moral relations. Windel-
band says that “Wollaston determined the content of the
moral law solely by metaphysical relations, and, accordingly, 7
in the last instance, by logical criteria.” He sought to ﬁnd
“an objective principle of morals in the general suitableness
of an action to its determining relations,” and “claimed for
this knowledge a self-evidence analogous to that of logical
relations.” He though also, says Windelband, that the
feeling of obligation which determines the will to appropri-
ate action “comes from the insight as to natures and rela-
tions.” 15 This same metaphysical interpretation of the
method of analogy is implied in what Blakey has to say of
it. He says that a great part of the reasoning on the eter-
nal nature of virtue is grounded upon “a principle of
analogy, which Clarke and Wollaston said existed between

" Warlaw, Christian, Ethics, pp. 303—5

1‘ Von Hartmann, Phanomenologie des Sittlichen Bewusstseins, p. 347.
"Windelband, His. of Phil., p. 504.

 

84 The Ethics of William Wollaston

our perceptions of good and evil and our mental perceptions
of ﬁgure and quality. Iniquity is the very same in action, as
contradiction is in theory.” 1" Perhaps this metaphysical
interpretation is even more pronounced in Grote than in any
of the moralists who so interpret Wollaston. In his chap-
ter “on the analogy between the intellectual and the moral
ideals,” he says, that “man is social to the bottom of his
mind.” It is for this reason, according to Grote, that when
a man thinks, he thinks generally. When we think, we think
not for our own intelligence alone, but for general intelli-
gence, and we verify our thoughts accordingly. Grote, then,
discusses the applicability of truth to action, showing the
close connection of our active and intellectual natures. The
two historic ideals of morality, that of rightness and that
of good, are he says, analogous and also historically closely
related to the ideals of truth, empiricism and rationalism.
The one view of knowledge is that things just impress them-
selves on us as they are. The other view is that we think of
things as we should. The term analogy is not quite strong
enough, thinks Grote, to express the relation between the
intellectual and the moral. “True,” he says, “the intellectual
suggests the moral,” but “the rightness which governs ac-
tions is an extension or wider application of the truth which
governs thought.” Moral action is as rational, he says, as
—is intellectual truth, “because as conformable to the nature
of things.” This is practically a quotation from Wollaston,
consequently it is very clear that Grote is. discussing him
although he mentions neither Clarke nor Wollaston by
name. He has them in mind, of course, when he says that
“many philosophers, whom we may call the intellectual mor-
alists, have followed out this view extensively.” The relation
of the good to the intellectual ideal of real being was, he
says, worked out by Plato in a very beautiful way. The
relation of rightness to truth was, he says, worked out in
very much the same way by the intellectual moralists."

" Blakey, His. of Moral Sc., p. 212.
1' Grate, A Treatise on Moral Ideals, pp. 60-7.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 85

II. The Search for an Objective Standard of Morality

The agreement between the world order and man’s reason
is the ground of moral obligation. It is essential to reason
to respect order, as soon as the idea of it is conceived. This
is what is meant by the objectivity of morality. It is entirely
consistent, then, to say that the reason is the moral faculty,
and at the same time say that the nature of morality is de-
termined by the objective nature of things. It must be
understood, however, that by reason we do not mean intuition
or innate idea, but rather the interpretative power of the
mind. At ﬁrst sight, it would appear as if there were two
very different criteria of morals in Wollaston’s system,
namely, the rationalistic principle which should guide one
in all his acts, and the objective principle, conformity to the
nature of things, which must characterize every action that
is denominated moral. The two are, however, for him, en-
tirely reconcilable, in that rational actions are precisely
those actions which are in conformity to the nature of
things, and, apart from such objective reference, one cannot
say that anything is either rational or irrational. Apart
from relations one cannot say that anything is true or false,
good or bad. Both our theory of knowledge and our theory
of morals must rest on an objective basis.

The law of identity constitutes the one ethical law for
Wollaston. True, a judgment expressing identity, A is
A, is an existential judgment, merely, and it expresses an
ought and becomes a moral judgment, only when it is ap-
propriated by a person. Its identity may then be afﬁrmed
or denied by deeds. Man belongs to two worlds, is and ought,
but, after all, ought is just acting in accordance with the
rationality of things. When, duly considered, the value
judgment is just an existential judgment of a higher and
more ultimate nature. As to the validity of this principle,
who can question the position that a man ought always to
act in such a way as to fulﬁll his rational nature, which can
be done only by living conformany to the real nature of
things? It is reason which differentiates man from the rest

 

86 The Ethics of William Wollaston

of the animal kingdom. The true life of man must, then, be
a rational life. A rational life is, on the one hand, a life
guided by self-knowledge, self-reverence and self-control;
but, on the other hand, it is a life, all acts of which must be
characterized by self-consistency and coherency,—in a word,
a life conformable to the objective nature of things. This
means that the good life is a life lived in accordance with the
logical laws of identity and contradiction. This means that
no action should deny essential relations and natures, or
stated positively, that everything should be treated in ac-
cordance with its nature and relations. Wrong denies the
indissoluble unity of life and the world, and is therefore
self-contradictory. Good aﬂirms this indissoluble unity of
life and the world, and is therefore self-consistent and co-
herent. The ﬁnite fragmentary self realizes itself only by
coming to think of itself as a signiﬁcant member of this unity
of life and the world, and the moral choices of such a life are
determined by this realization of the indissoluble unity of the
individual life with the entire cosmic order. EVerything in
the world gets its value and signiﬁcance from its relations
to other things. It is an inﬁnitely related system, and mor-
ality consists in the afﬁrmations of these in thought and deed,
whenever and wherever human lives are involved. Man being
free he can either aﬂirm or deny these essential life rela-
tions by his actions, and it is this freedom which constitutes
him a moral being.

This type of philosophizing came as a natural reaction to
the relativity of empiricism and hedonism. Morality, it was
felt, should possess universality and necessity in order to
have validity and authority. Professor Seth says that a
subjective basis failed to satisfy these conditions, so the
intellectualists made the appeal not to any moral sense or
moral faculty which is subjective and relative, but to the
moral reason which is universal.18 Wollaston realized that
both the subjective moral principles of interest, and of intui-
tion are insufﬁcient, and that an objective and logical prin-
ciple is necessary. In order to make morality objective he
tried to place it upon an intellectual basis. After criti-

” Seth, Ethical Principles, p. 173.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 87

cizing the extreme intellectualism of the system, Vorlander
grants that there is “a certain justiﬁcation for this because
it represents a reaction from systems of ethics which based
morality upon subjective feelings and inclinations” and
which paid little attention to the relation of the subject to
things and to persons.19 Von Hartmann says that Wollas-
ton’s attempt to carry out a pure rationalism in the realms
of morality is most noteworthy. “For he has seized with
philosophical daring and carried out with admirable acumen
the standpoint to which abstract rationalism of conscious
reﬂection must come.” He says that “consistent rationalism
is bound to acknowledge the consistency of this position.” 2°

Garve says that Clarke and Wollaston and the German
Kant must be considered as the inventors of a new moral
principle based completely on the reason. Garve is right
when he says that while Kant distinguished sharply between
the practical and the theoretical reason, Clarke and Wollas-
ton made no such distinction. Morality is based on a purely
rational principle and this is not conceived as a peculiar
kind of reason. Garve says that Clarke and Wollaston think
of morality “as a practice of reason,” but rightly says
that this is very different from Kant’s “practical reason”
or moral intuition.21 Garve understands this system of
morals to be based on the pure reason and so on the nature
of things learned by experience. Erdmann’s interpretation
is the same. He understands Wollaston to teach the objec-
tivity of morals. “What determines how they must be treated
are not a priori laws in one’s reason,” and since “there are
no such common principles given (da es keine solche all-
gemeine Vernunftprincipien geben) a priori to the human
mind men must think out on the basis of experience and
reason how they shall act.” So, he says, that Wollaston
teaches “dass grosse Gesetz der Religion, oder der Natur ist,
dass die Dinge als das behandelt werden, was sie sind.” It
follows from this “that not an inner imperative but the na-
ture of things determine the action and its worth.” 22 Win—

" Vorlﬁnder, Geschichter der Philosophiscen Moral, eta, p. 886.
" Von Hartmann, Phanomenologie des Sittlichen, etc., p. 345.
" Garve, Uebersicht der vornehmsten Prin. der Sittenl., p. 167.
" Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Philosophie, vol. II, p. 116.

 

88 The Ethics of William Wollaston

delband says that Wollaston sought to ﬁnd “an objective
principle of morals in the general suitableness of an action to
its determining relations.” 2" Vorlander interprets him as
ﬁnding the criterion in the objective; “Diejenige Handlung
is gut, welche der N atur des Gegenstandes angemessen
ist.” 24

In a system of ethics that is both rational and objective,
morality consists in the suitableness of the action to the na-
ture and relations of the object, and that, in the last analysis,
it is coincident with truth. This dual principle is clearly
shown in Vorlander exposition of Wollaston’s principle;
“The great commandment of Natural Religion or the great
moral principle is that every intelligent, acting and free
being shall thus act, that it does not contradict truth through
any action or that it treats everything according to what
it is.” Vorlander thinks that this is not really a dual prin-
ciple because to act rationally, “dass es durch keine Thatig-
keit einer Wahrheit widerspricht” means precisely “dass es
jedes Ding als das was es ist behandelt.” 2" Falckenberg un-
derstands Wollaston in the same way as Vorlalnder: “That
action is good whose execution includes the afﬁrmation of a
truth or whose omission the negation of a truth.” Accord-
ing to the law of nature, a rational being ought so to con-
duct himself that he shall never contradict a truth by his
actions, i. e., to treat each thing for what it is.” 2“ The
highest destination of man is, on the one hand, to know the
truth, and, on the other, to express it in actions. This does
not mean that there is any naked truth, for all truth is con-
cerned with things and relations. Hall says that Wollaston
“has an interesting discussion of moral good as essentially a
correspondence with the facts of the universe. . . . Truth is
the good because it corresponds to God’s nature, and all hu-
man acts are statements afﬁrming or denying in various de-
grees God’s eternal truth.” He quotes a passage from Wol-
laston which he thinks states his position: “Every intelli-

”Windclband, His. of Phil., p. 504.

" Vorlander, Gesch. der Philosophischen Moral, &c., p. 885.
" Ibid., p. 385. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

" Falckenberg, His. of Modern Phi., p. 196.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 89

gent, active and free being should so behave himself as by
no act to contradict truth, or that he should so treat every-
thing as being what it is.” 27

Windelband says that the philosophical element in the
system of Wollaston “is the striving after an objective basis
of morality.” He says that Wollaston “based” morality
“on the nature of things themselves,” and to this he also
“gave a logical turn. He viewed the matter from the stand-
point that there is involved in every moral action a theoreti-
cal proposition and therewith a judgment as to the things
treated or of the prevailing circumstances.28 He thinks that
Wollaston fails to distinguish clearly between the intellectual
and the moral, and yet he says that “of course he also pointed
out that a person must differentiate from this judgment not
only the action but the decisions as to the same.” Windel-
hand says one ﬁnds in this philosophy a careful investigation
of “the difference between will and an aﬂirmative judgment.”
But even after he has said this he goes right on and makes
a statement that makes it quite evident. that he does not
really get the signiﬁcance of the will in Wollaston’s system:
“Now, although Wollaston thought of the action as different '
from the judgment, he nevertheless meant that the worth of
the action stands or falls with the worth of the judgment,
and consequently he found the moral criterion in that this
judgment was either true or false.” I think that Windel-
band is wrong in saying that with Wollaston “das der Werth
der Handlung mit dem Werthe dieses Urtheils stehe und
falle.” It is not true that a moral action is one that truly
recognizes “the object or relation to which the action refers,”
for a wrong action as truly as a right action recognizes the
truth of the case, but rather is the moral action one that is
conformable to the recognized truth. According to Wol-
laston an evil action also recognizes the truth of the nature
and relations of things and the act could not be morally
wrong otherwise.29

" Hall, His. of Christian Ethics, p. 453.

'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

” Windelband, Gesch. der N eurn Philosophie, vol. II, pp. 266-7. Wol-
laston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 7-8.

 

90 The Ethics of William Wollaston

Wundt says that according to Wollaston’s principle,
moral norms possess an objective reality equal to that of
mathematical or physical laws, “so that a transgression of
law in the moral realm is like a change in the proportion of
bodies which breaks the laws of nature in the physical
world. As truth consists in the agreement of our ideas with
the nature of things, so good consists in the agreement of
our acts with things. . . . To act according to nature is,
in Wollaston’s opinion, to act morally and in obedience to
God.” He was perhaps inﬂuenced by the natural philosophy
of Newton, Wundt thinks, in thus regarding morality “in
the light of a violation of the laws of nature.” While Wundt
thinks this to be a defect, still, he says, “this attempt to
prove the objectivity of morals, as against the subjectivity
of current views of morals, was historically important.” 3°

Stewart says that Wollaston tried to reconcile Locke’s
theory of the origin of ideas with the immutability of moral
distinctions by taking the position that virtue consists in
conduct conformable to truth. He said that right and wrong
cannot be just simple ideas, as the intuitionalists taught,
“but that morality must be conformity with relations per-
ceived by the reason.” 31 In discussing the historical origin
of Wollaston’s objective principle of morality, Erdmann has
this to say: “Locke placed both speculative and practical
principles in the same class, taking the position that neither
are innate. He went further, however, and made the posi-
tive statement that the speculative principles are presented
to the mind by the external world.” Now, says Erdmann,
Wollaston took the same positive position in regard to
practical principles: “The mind cannot draw the principles
of action from within itself, they must come to it from
without.” He says that “ the moral law,” for Wollaston,
“is summed up in the formula: We should follow nature,
or treat everything as that which it is. . . . In our actions
we should act as things prescribe.” 32

“For a man to act virtuously,” according to Blakey’s un-

’° Wundt, Ethics, p. 66.

’1 Stewart, Works, vol. V1, p. 290.
“Erdmann, His. of Phil., vol. II, pp. 116-20.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 91

derstanding of Wollaston, “he must square his conduct ac-
cording to the truth of things; or to treat everything ac-
cording to its real character, or as it really is.” He be-
lieved in the stability of the laws of nature, says Bailey,
and that everything in the world is regulated by inﬁnite wis-
dom. His system of ethics is “grounded on a simple meta-
physical principle that truth in everything is to be in con-
formity with the constituted order of nature.” 3" Bain says:
“With him, a bad action contains the denial of a true propo-
sition. . . . Truth can be denied by actions as well as by
words. Thus the violation of a contract is the denial by
action that the contract has been concluded. . . . Bobbing
a traveler is the denial that what you take from him is his.
. . . An action that denies one or more true propositions
cannot be good, and is necessarily bad. A good action is
one whose omission would be bad or whose contrary is bad,
in the above sense.” 3“

There is in the system of Wollaston an a priori element,
namely, that one can know as a universal and necessary ﬁrst
principle of morality that an intelligent being should always
act rationally. This is, however, entirely reconcilable with
the demand that morality be objective, because acting ra-
tionally means acting in conformity to the nature of things.
Wollaston insists that, apart from such objective reference,
we cannot say that any action is either rational or irrational.
It follows, of course, that, apart from such objective refer-
ence, no action can be pronounced either good or bad. He
would not admit that an action can be called good, simply
because the will or the intention is good, but the objectivity
of his principle demands that there be some anticipatory
consideration of consequences. As Von Hartmann says,
though, there 'is a tendency for one who has accepted the
principle that morality must be based on reason to “make
the immediate basis of morality that theoretical rationality
with which he is best acquainted” and to “proclaim truth
as the principle of morality.” 3“ There is no truth that has

"Blakey, His. of Moral Sc., p. 152. Briley, His. of Phil., vol. 111,
pp. 7 and 8.

“Bain, Moral Sc., p. 152.
" Von Hartmann, PhanomenOIOgie des Sittl. Bewusstseins, p. 343.

 

92 The Ethics of William Wollaston

not an objective reference for there can be no reality to
knowledge that is not a knowledge of reality; consequently,
when morality is based on truth it is based on the nature of
things, not on intuition,——truths independent of ob jective
reference, for there are no such truths. Erdmann very truly
says that only those propositions are true, “which deﬁne
things as they actually are (welche die Dinge so setzen, wie
sie wicklich sind), or truth is the conformity of symbols
or names with the things themselves.” Erdmann says that
Wollaston ﬁrst gives his principle as if it were a purely for-
mal one, but later explains it “more deﬁnitely to the eﬂ'ect
that that action is good which is in accord with the nature
of the object (die Handlung gut ist, welche der N atur des
Gegenstandes gemass ist).” 3“

Wollaston’s assertion that truth constitutes the moral
principle, together with his view that ethics must have an
objective basis asserts, or at least implies, an idealistic view
of the world, because these two things could both be true,
consistent and coherent, only if they both belonged to a
world of meaning, a coherent world order.37 Perhaps
Clarke brings out these broader relations somewhat more
clearly, in some respects, than does Wollaston. It is in the
nature of things, that is, in the nature of reality and man,
says Clarke, that moral distinctions are founded. The in-
dividual soul stands to the rest of nature in the relation of
subject and object, the perceiving mind and the things
perceived. The universe is reasonable and the same reason
which pervades the whole, exists also in each individual. He
does not mean that this exists as a divine implantation, for
he goes on to say that the reason in man perceives reason
elsewhere. “If a natural or a ﬁtting thing exists it will be
perceived by the individual mind.” Rationality demands
conformity not only in thought, but also in life to “the
absolute reason of things.” 38

Schmidt says that Wollaston’s norm of conduct lies not
within, but in things, “to whose true nature our deeds and

“ Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Philosophie, vol. II, pp. 113-4.
7 '7 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 7-8 and 19.
“ Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 42. Wollaston, Reli. of N at., etc., p. 93.

 

General Interpretation of Section I 93

words must simply conform.” This does not mean, says
Schmidt, that Wollaston thought morality consisted in g
acting conformany to things viewed singly, but each thing
is to be thought of “in connection with the others, in its
relations to all others.” This is one of the best interpreta-
tions of Wollaston. It implies that this objective order has
a metaphysical meaning, and I am very sure that Wollaston
understands it that way. Wollaston speaks of an immoral
action as opposing the will» of the Author of nature and as
contradicting nature and truth. These untrue and unnat-
ural things are wrong, he says, because they “break through
the constitution of things.” 3" Gass gives Wollaston’s prin-
ciple of conformity to nature a similar metaphysical in-
terpretation. In a rational system of morality, like that of
Wollaston, Gass says “that every will must be determined by
a universal purpose as well as by the nature of the individual
case (dass jeder Wille durch eine allgemine Zweckmassig-
keit sowie anderseits durch die Beschaﬂ'enheit des eigelnen.
Falles bestimmt werde).” Gass says that the “appropri-
ateness of acting conformany to the nature of things
strongly “recommends itself through itself. It makes the
impression of the ﬁtting by which disorder and extravagance
are excluded and through its rule it guarantees also happi—
ness.” 4° Gass understands Wollaston to mean that it is
inherently rational to act conformany to the nature of
things. He also understands him to say that the experiences
of life justify the belief in the rationality of the criterion.
Wollaston is considered by Morell to belong to the move-
ment characterized by him as English Polemical Idealism.
He says that in England Idealism has always appeared as
an opposition movement. The English mind is of a practi-
cal bent and not naturally inclined to speculation, conse-
quently in England “the rationalistic method of philoso-
phizing has seldom been carried to any great extent, except
it has been occasioned and almost necessitated by the ex-

”Schmidt, Das Gewissen, p. 296. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin.,
38

3' dass, Gesch. der Christlichen Ethik, p. 19. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat.
Delin., pp. 8, ll, 15, 38 and 59.

 

94s The Ethics of William Wollaston

cesses of the opposite school.” Wollaston, he says, must
be regarded as the opponent of extreme empiricism. “The
ground he takes in his ethical system, namely, that virtue
consists in acting according to the truth of things, is a
sufﬁcient proof that he regarded some conception as abso-
lutely necessary, and originating in the very constitution
of man’s rational nature.” Since Morell says that this abso-
lutely necessary conception of morality is, that “virtue con-
sists in acting according to the truth of things,” he cannot
mean by “originating in the very constitution of man’s
rational nature,” that morality is based on innate ideas.
He says explicity that experience is involved in moral knowl-
edge. Idealism is involved, Morell thinks, in Wollaston’s
thought that there are certain ﬁxed relations in the universe,
cognizable by the human reason, and that virtue consists
in acting conformany thereto.“‘1

The idealistic interpretation of Wollaston’s ethical sys-
tem is perhaps shown more clearly by Victor Catherein than
by any other commentator. We are, according to Catherein
to treat everything according to its own nature, but also
“nach seinem Verhﬁltniss zu uns und zum Weltganzen.” He
thinks that a thing cannot be treated according to its na-
ture, or treated as what it is, without a due consideration
of “its relations to us and to the entire universe.” This
is‘true because a thing is really nothing apart from its con-
nections with other things. Without such relations it cer-
tainly could have no ethical signiﬁcance, “denn alle Dinge
seien so eingerichtet, das sie zusammen ein harmonisches
Weltganze bildeten.” ‘2

“Morell, His. of Modern Phil., p. 137.
“Catherein, Moralphilosophie, p. 215.

 

WOLLASTON AND HIS CRITICS

I wish to consider in this division of my treatise the gen-
eral criticisms that have been made of Wollaston’s intellec-
tual system of Ethics. Speciﬁc criticisms of speciﬁc por-
tions of his work are treated in the appropriate place. I
think that an extensive consideration of Wollaston’s critics
is justiﬁed on the ground that the very raison d’étre of
writing the thesis is to show that Wollaston has been a very
much abused man, and especially to show that he was not
guilty of holding the nonsensical views he has been supposed
to hold. I will now take up in a systematic way the criti-
cisms that have been made to his system.

I. CRITICISM

THAT HE CONFUSES LOGICAL AND MORAL RELATIONS

The criticism that has been most frequently oﬁ'ered to
Wollaston is that he confuses logical and moral relations.
This has been so from the beginning. John Clarke, a con-
temporary of Wollaston, makes this criticism of his cri-
terion of morality. In regard to the contention of Wollas-
ton “that men may by their actions or omissions deny truth,”
John Clarke says, that the only meaning this can have is
that “actions . . . are expressive . . . of propositions,”
that they are ways “of conveying sense . . . to the minds of
others.”1 This is, of course, just the common confusion
due to the failure to understand that Wollaston speaks of
actions which express merely intellectual meaning, actions
of the pantomime and gesture variety; and also of actions
expressive of character, moral actions. This confusion is
made evident by what follows. Clarke says that all that
Wollaston can mean is that an action may convey a false

‘ J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Moral Good, p. 20.

95

 

96 The Ethics of William Wollaston

impression “even where a person has no intention by his ac-
tion of conveying any such sense to the mind of others.”
Wollaston says that in such cases ‘moral good and evil is
not imputable.” 2

I have already considered several of the speciﬁc criticisms
made of particular portions of the work of Wollaston by
his contemporary, Bott. While his criticism is conﬁned al-
most exclusively to Proposition IX, it has a general appli-
cation also, because he thinks that in this proposition Wol-
laston states his “principal notion” of morality. Bott
thinks that Wollaston fails to give a real diﬁ'erentia of mor-
ality. He says even after the idea of importance is added
to that of truth, it is still inadequate as a moral criterion,
for “those acts in which there is an equal agreement or dis-
agreement, will be, in an equality, morally good or evil.” 3
He thinks that this will not hold, for if it did then two mor-
ally contradictory acts would be equally moral, which is
impossible. He' states a case like this. Two men A and C
both meet a poor wretch, B, at the point of starvation. A
“takes notice of his case, says everything that is right about
it, and goes his way. C comes immediately after, sees what
B’s case is, gives him relief and departs. Here A’s words
and C’s actions are supposed perfectly to agree with B’s
circumstances; that is, in the language of our author, they
each of them say, B’s case is really what it is: and there-
fore, according to him, because the agreement is equal, the
moral goodness of their acts must be equal too. But is this
true? Nay, is it true, even though we should suppose, that
A really had it not in his power to do more? It won’t im-
mediately follow, that his act was morally as good as C’s.
Again, D meets the wretch B, and denies his case to be what
it is, and calls him a cheat, though he. knows to the con-
trary. E meets with him, and beats him to any degree. It
will be impossible not to ﬁnd both these persons equally
moral, according to our author; yet certainly they are not
so.” 4 This confusion has been dealt with, at length, else-

” Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7. '
' Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 11.
‘ Ibid., pp. 11-19.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 97

where, but I will say that it rests upon a failure to distin-
guish between the two ways in which truth can be aﬂirmed or
denied. Wollaston says, “A true proposition may be denied
or things may be denied to be what they are, by deeds, as
well as by express words. It is certain there is a meaning
in many acts and gestures. . . . But these do not come up
to my meaning. There are many acts of other kinds, such
as constitute the character of a man’s conduct in life.” 5

Bott, then, proceeds to state another case where there is
precisely the same confusion between intellectual truth and
morality. “If P says T’s horse is his, when really he is not,
he is as guilty as if he actually stole him. For the dis—
agreement in both these instances of P’s actions with the
truth of the case, is equal. In short, for anything there is
in our author’s deﬁnition, there is no difference betwixt a
man’s talking to a post, as if he were a man, and beating
him as though he were a post.” 6 Wollaston practically an-
ticipates this criticism in his case of a man stealing a horse
and riding away upon him. He may, Wollaston grants,
conform to some truth by so acting, for he is treating the
horse as a horse. He is, however, acting in violation of
other truths.7 The mere assertion by P that T’s horse is
his, Wollaston says, violates very little truth compared to
actually stealing a horse.8 Wollaston says that talking, to
a post is not so wrong as it is absurd, because the nature
of personality is not greatly violated and that is the all-im-
portant truth.9

Bott says that “the author has put into his deﬁnition a
qualifying word or two, in order to escape the objection of
his making all morally evil acts . . . and all good ones, .
equal. He brings in, Bott says, the phrase “in some degree
or other,” because there can, of course, be no “equality of
all evil or all good actions.” 1° Wollaston goes further,
says Bott, and makes the qualifying statement that “those

'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p..8.

“Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 12.
' Ibid., p. 12.

' Ibid., p. 19.

' Ibid., p. 20.

a'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 20-1.

 

98 The Ethics of William Wollth

truths which they respect, though they are equally true, may
comprise matters of very different importance; or more
truths may be violated one way than another.” 11 Bott
thinks that in bringing in these qualifying terms Wollaston
really gives up the criterion of conformity to truth. With
this criterion, Bott says, that “the difference of actions can-
not depend upon the different importance of the truths
respected by them,” because any “good action asserts a
thing to be what it is, . . . so it is impossible that any other
good action . . . should do more with reference to the
truth respected by it.” 12 Bott does not make good his
criticism because he has no reason for his insistence that
either morally or scientiﬁcally considered truths are of equal
importance. Truths are equally true but they are not
equally important. He implies that there is some ﬂaw in the
argument that a thing must be considered in all respects but
he offers no refutation of it.18 An action may conform to a
truth and at the same time violate a thousand truths far
more signiﬁcant. Every immoral act conforms to some
truths, but it is, nevertheless, essentially untrue and cannot
be made to ﬁt into a coherent world order. Such a state-
ment does not involve the denial of the criterion of truth,
as Bott supposes.“ The same kind of objection could be
made against any criterion of morality.

Vorl'alnder understands Wollaston to say that “every bad
action is a lie (jede schlechte Handlung ist eine Liige); to
violate an agreement means actually to deny it. A wrong
is so much greater the more true propositions it denies; the
good act must then be in accord with all relations of the
object.” 15 If we had only the last statement we would
think that Vorlander understood Wollaston, but a wrong
deed does not deny true propositions. He only teaches that
a wrong deed is as false to world and life relations as is the
denial of a true proposition. It is wrong precisely because
it is based on assent to theoretical truth and is inconsistent

11Bott, “Reli. of Nat. Delin.” Considered and Refuted, p. 13.
3' Ibid., p. 14-.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

“ Ibid., p. 15.

1' Vorliinder, Gesch. der Philosophischen Moral, ctc., p. 385.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 99

therewith. Wundt has a somewhat better understanding of
Wollaston, but he thinks that Wollaston confuses intellectual
and moral relations. He takes the position that Wollaston
considered moral wrong and intellectual error as equally
contradictory “riickt das sittliche Vergehen auf gleiche
Linie mit intellectuellem Irrthum.” 1" Moral wrong and in-
tellectual error are equally contradictory, because they are
equally inconsistent with the true nature of things. Wollas-
ton insists that this is so, but he does not confuse the two
very different kinds of things,—-immoral acts and intellectu-
ally erroneous judgments.17 Hume says that error is not
sin as he understands Wollaston to believe. There is no
immorality, Hume says, in merely making an erroneous
judgment, but “if moral distinctions be derived from the
truth or falsehood of these judgments, they must take place
whenever we form the judgment.” 18 This is, of course, true
if immorality be but an erroneous judgment. Wollaston
does not say that immorality is just an erroneous judg-
ment, but something very different, namely, that immorality
is as false as a false judgment.19

Price denies that all immorality can be reduced to that of
denying truth, or afﬁrming a lie. Nor is he agreed that this
can serve as a formal statement of morality; because he says
“there may be no intention to deny anything true, or to as-
sent to anything false.” A falsehood is not general but is
“a distinct species of evi .” Yet, Price goes right on and
grants that in immorality we act as if the person we
sin against did not exist, “which upon any other supposi-
tion, is inexcusable; and therefore, ﬁguratively speaking,
may be said to contradict truth.” He even grants that Wol-
laston probably “meant in reality little more than this.” 2°
Price says that cruelty can certainly be considered as act-
ing in a way that is contradictory, but denies that the evil
of cruelty can be regarded as the same as that of telling a
lie. It seems to me that he and Wollaston agree entirely as

“Wundt, Ethik, p. 823.

1' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

1' Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 460.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

" Price, Review of the Principal Questions in Morals, p. 208.

 

100 The Ethics of William Wollaston

to the relation of truth and morality, but Price thinks that
Wollaston identiﬁes the intellectual and the moral.21

Balguy takes very much the same attitude as Price. He
says to treat men as brutes is as “dissonant to the nature of
things, as would be the attempt to form an angle with two
parallel lines; because, as a matter of fact, there is a great
difference between the nature of rational creatures and that
of brutes.” But he says that he would not characterize
such conduct as acting a lie, because “that would be con-
founding objective and subjective truth.” “Neither would
I,” he says, “call it a contradiction of some true proposi-
tion.” He says that he would call immorality “a counterac-
tion to the truth or real nature of things. If by truth is
meant the truth of things, it may be truly said that goodness
consists of actions in conformity thereto.” 22 Balguy evi-
dently agrees with Wollaston and is simply trying to make
clear the fact that goodness consists of actions conformable
to the real natures of things, just as truth consists of ideas
that conform to the real nature of things. I can see no
reason why Balguy should object to calling immorality
“acting a lie,” 23 for there is certainly a great diﬁ'erence
between saying that immorality is “acting a lie” and saying
that all immorality reduces itself to lying. He seems to
think that they are the same, so he accuses Wollaston of
saying that all immorality is simply lying.

One of the most interesting critics of Wollaston is the
French philosopher J ouﬂ'roy who states the essential char
acteristics of the ethical system of Wollaston in this way:
“According to this philosophy, good is truth, and the funda-
mental law of conduct, the duty from which all others are
derived, is to act conformable to the truth, or, in other
words, not to deceive by actions.” He, then, asks what
method Wollaston uses to establish his doctrine, and he
answers, in the traditional fashion of Wollaston’s critics,
that he “begins with the assertion that actions, like words,
are signs, and that the truth may be afﬁrmed or denied by

“ Price, Review of the Principal Questions in Morals, p. 693.
" Balguy, The Foundations of Moral Goodness, Brit. MoraL, p. 79.
"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 11.

 

Wollaston amd His Critics 101

actions as well as by words.” 24 J ouﬁ'roy fails to consider
the distinction Wollaston makes between actions of the ges-
ture variety that express or disguise, actions used as signs
and constituting a kind of language, and actions “such as
constitute the character of a man’s conduct in life.” 25 He
uses “expressed or disguised” and “afﬁrmed or denied” with
precisely the same meaning, whereas they mean something
very different for Wollaston. When he says an action
afﬁrms a truth be is not saying that this is but another way
of expressing the same truth as expressed in words, but this
seems to be J ouffroy’s interpretation of his meaning. To
be sure the one kind of thing is as much conformable to true
relations as the other but there the resemblance stops. In
a similar way he misconceives Wollaston’s meaning when
he understands him to argue “that an action which denies a
true proposition, is equivalent to a false proposition. A
false proposition is bad; therefore, the action which is
equivalent to it cannot be good.” 2“ Now, Wollaston does
not say that an action which denies a true proposition is
equivalent to a false proposition, but what he says is that
bad actions deny the real natures of things as truly as do
false propositions. Wrong acts are as false and as contra-
dictory as false propositions, because they are as incon-
sistent with the nature of things in a coherent world, but
this is very far from an identiﬁcation of truth and goodness.
Then Wollaston does not say that a false proposition is
morally bad but only intellectually bad or false.27

In many places J ouffroy seems to have a very clear com-
prehension of Wollaston’s thought: “An action which de-
nies a true proposition denies that which actually is. It is
a revolt against reason. Such an action is contrary to the
nature of man, for man is a rational creature and the peculi-
arity of rational creatures is to see and love things as they
are.” 23 J ouffroy proceeds, in the very next paragraph,
to misinterpret Wollaston entirely: “Wollaston goes one

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
“Jouﬂ’roy, Intro. to Ethics, pp. 334—5.
" Ibid., p. 335. .
"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 14.
"Jouﬁ'roy, Intro. to Ethics, p. 336.

 

102 The Ethics of William Wollaston

step further and proves that a true proposition may be de-
nied by omissions as well as by commissions; or, what amounts
to the same thing, that the omission is quite as much a sign
as the action, and that we may afﬁrm what is false, as well
by the former of these signs as .by the latter.” He is still
laboring under the delusion that it is Wollaston’s position
that actions are but another kind of language or medium
of expressing thought. He thinks that this identity of
truth and morality is brought out in Wollaston’s treatment
of the development of morality. “If science is progressive
morality must be so too; for, as morality is nothing more
than truth expressed in conduct, it presupposes a knowledge
of truth.” 2” Of course morality advances as science ad-
vances, but this only means that as our knowledge increases
we can act more and more in conformity with the nature of
things. It is true that morality is truth expressed in con-
duct, but this is saying something quite other than that
morality is just a form of truth. A distinction must be made
between the coherence of truth and goodness and their
identity. A coherent world demands the unity of the two
realms, but morality demands also the distinction of the
world of appreciation from the world of description. Wol—
laston did not swamp morality on the one hand, nor did he
fail to realize its metaphysical implications on the other.
Janet’s understanding of the ethical philosophy of Wol—
laston is much the same as that of J ouﬁ'roy. In his chapter
on the True, the Good, and the Beautiful, he says, that
Wollaston is “the philosopher who most emphatically main-
tained the identity of the true and the good.” He under-
stands Wollaston to maintain that virtue consists simply in
the afﬁrmation of the truth. And so he does, but it must be
remembered that the kind of afﬁrmation of truth Wollaston
had in mind, when he so characterized virtue, is that of a
free moral act in conformity to the nature of things. Janet,
apparently, understands this in the examples he gives, e. g.,
to steal is to afﬁrm that what does not belong to us does
belong to us, that is, our action is contradictory to facts
’Jouﬁ'roy,1ntro.toEthics,p.837. Wollaston-,RelLOfNat. Delin., p. 16.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 103

and to our knowledge of them.30 He evidently does not
understand him, though, for he proceeds to make the tradi-
tional criticism that Wollaston reduces all vice to lying.
Wollaston had only said that all vice is false action, lying
actions, you might term them, or actions that contradict
truth, and not that all vice is lying. Vice is as absurd as
any contradictory proposition, but it is not absurd simply
in the logical sense of the word. The absurdity of im-
morality consists in acting contrary to admitted logical
truth. “Virtue is nothing else than reason,” Janet under-
stands Wollaston to mean, but this interpretation can be
accepted only when due consideration is given to the fact
that he insists that the will is involved in all moral behavior.
A better interpretation, then, is that virtue is acting ration-
ally or acting conformany to the true nature of things. He
seems to interpret him in this way when he says that Wol-
laston is “one of those philosophers who regard moral veri-
ties simply as eternal and necessary relations, conformable
to the nature of things,” but he straightway proceeds to
criticize him on the ground that he confuses the good and
the true. “It is,” he says, “quite certain that moral veri-
ties are truths, but.it does not follow that the good must
be the true.” 31 But Wollaston never says that the good is
the true, but only that it is conformable with the true, a very
diﬁ'erent thing.32

Janet says that there is subjective truth, the conformity
of thoughts to objects, and objective truth, the necessary
and essential relations of things; but neither in the subjec‘
tive nor in the objective sense is truth identical with good.
Certainly not, but the good is the conformity of life to
truth and to reality. This is really Janet’s own position as
is very evident from his discussion of the subjective and
.objective good. He says: “The good, like the true, may
also be understood in two senses . . . one objective, the
other subjective. Objectively, the good is the character,

“Janet, Theory of Morals, p. 106.
“Ibid., p. 107.
" Wollaston, .Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

 

104 The Ethics of William Wollaston

based upon the essence of things, which imposes an obliga-
tory law upon the moral agent. Subjectively, good is the
conformity of the will to this obligatory law.” That this is
his view is made even more evident in his discussion of the
distinctions. “N ow,'the objective good is not the same as
the objective true; . . . and the subjective good is not the
same as the subjective true. Subjectively, the true is the
conformity of thought with its object: now, good, consid-
ered subjectively, is the conformity of the will with its ob-
ject. The true concerns only the understanding; the good
concerns only the will. The conception of truth, as such,
when it appears, is inevitable: moral action, . . . that is,
the conformity of action to the law . . . is not inevitable.
I cannot wish that what is true should be false, nor that what
is false should be true; I cannot wish that two and two
would make ﬁve, when my reason shows me their sum. is
four; but I can wish that my actions should be conformed or
not conformed to what my reason tells me is true.” 33 Janet
here gives his own view, incidental to his criticism of Wollas-
ton, but I do not know of a better exposition of Wollaston’s
principle than this. His criticism of Wollaston is based on
an entire misunderstanding of him. I think it quite probable
that he did not know Wollaston at ﬁrst hand at all, for he
does not quote him or give any of his examples, illustrative
of his position. How beside the point is this: “Criminal
actions are always accompanied by more or less falsehood;
but, as regards their nature, they are not lies.” “The rob-
ber who takes a watch, does not by this act afﬁrm that the
watch belongs to him; what he afﬁrms is that he wishes to
get the good of it, this is all that he asks. The intrinsic
truth of the proposition matters little to him.” But that is
just the point. The robber is, on every hand, ruthlessly
disregarding truth, acting as if it were not truth while as
an intelligent being he can but admit truth to be truth.
His other example is even more absurd. If a man robs a
warehouse his denial that it is a warehouse “is only an inci-
dental accompaniment of the act, it is not its basis.” 3‘

aJanet, Theory of Morals, p. 108.
“Ibid., p. 108.

 

 

Wollaston and His Critics 105

Janet thinks that‘we must have a criterion other than that
of rationality, otherwise we would not know which kind of
truth to obey, since both good and bad actions represent
truth. Unless one, believes that there is a fundamental dis-
tinction between good and bad how am I to know always
just what my duty is? But what more universality and
necessity could be desired than that of the principle that the
good consists in the conformity of life to the nature of
things? 35

La Rossignol says that the ethical philosophy of Wollas-
ton is an exaggeration of the worst aspects of the system
of Clarke. “To say that a thing is true, implies intellectual
assent; to say it is right, implies moral approval.” La
Rossignol says that Clarke confused these but did not quite
identify them as Wollaston afterwards did. He says that
Wollaston failed to notice that “nature and agreement or
conformity of action with nature are very different kinds of
ideas, and therefore to be applied to different things. There
is the same distinction between them as between is and ought,
true and right, real and ideal.” 3" He states that Wollaston’s
position is that “all sin is in effect the denial of a true propo-
sition, and moral good the afﬁrmation of it.” He gives as
his reference the Britannica article on Wollaston. He says
that this represents “a curious one-sided development of
Clark’s theory of ethics. Clarke, he grants, asserts some-
thing very similar “when he speaks of those who refuse to
live according to the laws of justice and truth,” as “endeav-
oring to make things to be what they are not and cannot
be, which is the greatest absurdity imaginable, . . . in a
word; all willful wickedness and perversion of right, is the
very absurdity in moral matters as it would be in natural
things, for a man to pretend to alter the certain proportions
of numbers, to take away demonstrable relations of mathe-
matics, to make light darkness, or to call sweet bitter and
bitter sweet.” 37 “This strange language approaches very
nearly to the assertion that ‘whatever is is right’.” La Ros-

“Janet, Theo of Morals, p. 109.
" La Rossigno , The Ethical Phil. of Clarke, p. 50 ﬁ‘.
" Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 41.

 

106 The Ethics of William Wollaston

signol says that such a conclusion can be logically drawn
from Clarke’s statements that those who fail to conform
their lives to “the eternal ﬁtness of things are setting up
their own unreasonable self-will in opposition to the nature
and reason of things.” 38

La Rossignol says that Wollaston took as his text the
statement from Clarke, which I have just given, that morality
consists in the conformity of life to the reason and nature of
things. La Rossignol says that Clarke did not follow this
statement to its logical conclusion, but Wollaston did. He
thinks, also, that this statement of Clarke’s suggested to
Wollaston the “analogy between virtue and truth.” If it
is but an analogy'where is the point to his criticism? As
we have seen, he says he bases his interpretation on the
Britannica article which reads: “Moral evil is the practical
denial of a true proposition, and moral good the afﬁrmation
of it.” 39 But La Rossignol fails to give any signiﬁcance to
the idea of its being a “practical,” not an actual denial or
afﬁrmation, and he forgets that he has himself said that Wol-
laston’s method is that of analogy. So interpreted the mean—
ing is that bad actions are as false as false propositions and
good actions as true as true propositions; but La Ros-
signol’s interpretation is quite different, namely, “That every
right action is the afﬁrmation of a truth, and every wrong
action is the denial of a truth.” 4° He takes as a case that
of stealing, and says that it is wrong because it denies that
the stolen property belongs to someone else. The fact is
that Wollaston insists that the rogue admits the property
to belong not to himself but to someone else, and herein
consists his inconsistency and consequent immorality in that
he “practically” denies that to which he must give assent.41

La Rossignol makes a distinction between the teachings of
the two moralists, Clarke and Wollaston, for which there is
no ground. He says that while Clarke does say that every
wrong action is absurd he does not mean that it is such be-

“Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 42.

“Anon, Art. Wollaston, Britan.

“La Rossignol, The Ethical Phil. of Clarke, p. 51.
“ Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., pp. 7-8.

 

 

Wollaston amd Hi: Critics 107

cause it is like denying A is A, as did Wollaston; but in his
thinking “this absurdity had rather reference to the clear-
ness of moral perception than the actual denial of a fact.”
Clarke’s meaning, he says, is that “it is unreasonable to act
wrongly,” not, apparently, because immoral acts are. as
absurd as the denial of something evidently true, but “be-
cause reason is the moral faculty, and it is unreasonable to
deny a fact because reason asserts it.” ‘2 I am very sure
that this is not Clarke’s meaning, but that his conception of
the relation of the intellectual and the moral is the same as
that of Wollaston. He was as intellectualistic. as Wollaston
for he also made the distinguishing of good and evil a kind of
knowledge. He, even, says that “reason is the faculty
whereby we are able to distinguish good and evil.” ‘3 La
Rossignol fails absolutely in his interpretation in that he
does not see the signiﬁcance of “willful” and “practical,” as
used by Clarke and Wollaston along with “afﬁrmation” and
“denial,” and that this together with such statements as
that “the very absurdity in moral matters as it would be in
natural things” does make the distinction between natural
and moral, between the is and the ought.

Many of the critics of Wollaston have taken the position
that since morality, in his system, consists in afﬁrming the
truth of a true proposition, it is therefore dependent upon
correct knowledge. Garve says that it is a very ingenious
system and that Wollaston has worked it out very skillfully,
but says “unspeakable compulsion” is used to make “it at
all probable that every action expresses a proposition and
that the moral worth of that action is to be judged according
to the truth or untruth of the proposition (dass jede Hand-
lung. einen Satz ausdriicke, und dass, nach der Wahrheit
oder Unwahrheit dieses Satzes, die sittliche Giite jener Hand-
lung zu beurtheilen sei).” ‘4 Wollaston certainly does not
mean that every action actually expresses a proposition, but
he means only that a good action is conformable to reality
and so in practice afﬁrms truth. The morality of an action

“ La Rossignol, The Ethical Phil. of Clarke, pp. 51 and 85-7.
" Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 39.
“ Garve, Ucbersicht der vomchmsten Prin. dcr Sittcnl., p. 175.

 

108 The Ethics of William Wollaston

does not consist in the truth of the proposition but in the true
conformity of life to real relations.

Erdmann says that Wollaston founds morality on truth
and so “makes acting dependent on correct knowledge of
things (das giite {Handeln von der richtigen Erkenntniss der
Dinge abhﬁngig macht).” ‘5 Windelband takes the same
position. He thinks that Wollaston reduces immorality to
ignorance and morality to knowledge. “Wollaston says that
since every action involves a theoretical judgment as to its
underlying relations, the decision as to whether the act is
right or wrong in the ethical sense depends upon the right-
ness (correctness) or wrongness of this judgment.” 4" In his
criticism Windelband says that immorality consists not in
having an incorrect idea of cosmic relations, but in acting
contrary to our thinking about those relations. This I
understand to be Wollaston’s position. The theoretical
judgment as to relations is as correct in the case of wrong
as in the case of right action. Both equally involve the
assent to intellectual truth. The immorality of the unsuit—
able act consists precisely in the practical denial of ad-
mittedly true relations."

Leslie Stephen says that the intellectual criterion made
quite an impression upon the contemporaries of Wollaston,
some of whom, e. g., Conybeare, speak of the theory as
though it were a discovery in morals, ﬁt to be placed beside
the discoveries of Newton in astronomy.48 But Leslie Ste-
phen thinks that there is nothing very wonderful about it,
since instead of explicating morals it merely confuses ethical
and logical relations. “He who acts upon the hypothesis
that things are so and so, proclaims by his acts that they are
so and so; and no act that interferes with a true proposi-
tion can be right.” Stephen says that “no act can interfere
with a true proposition. Hence I ought not to kill a man '
because by so doing, I deny him to be a man. To which it
was obvious to reply that my action proclaims the very

“Erdmann, Gcsch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 107.
“Windelband, His. of Phil., p. 504.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., . 20.
'“Conybeare, Defence of Reveale Reli., p. 289.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 109

reverse.” 4’ In reply I will say that Wollaston does
not take the position that a wrong act rests upon a false
proposition. He misses Wollaston’s meaning entirely. Of
course “it is a verbal juggle to call an action a lie,” but
this Wollaston does not do. His position is simply this:
one must assent to truth when clearly apprehended, but it
lies within a man’s power to practically deny a true prOpo-
sition, namely, by acting as if the truth were not the truth.
The essence of immorality in this is inconsistency, and it is
the conﬂict between the truth of the situation and the false
action that constitutes the inconsistency.

Leslie Stephen thinks that this view of ethics is related
to the “common theory of metaphysicians which identiﬁes
crime with error, and which had latterly been presented in
more imposing forms by many more famous metaphysicians.”
According to this view “all immorality involves an element of
intellectual error. To one who had adequate conceptions
of the universe, and to whose intellect, therefore, all the con-
sequences of his actions were immediately present, the wis-
dom of virtue would be so evident that crime would be im-
possible.” 5" I can see the reason for associating Wollas-
ton’s metaphysical ethics with immediately preceding meta-
physical systems for he was undoubtedly inﬂuenced by them
in formulating his own Weltanschauung, but I' can see no
reason for saying that he held any such view as to the rela-
tion of virtue as Leslie Stephen attributes to him. I think
that this misinterpretation is due to the failure to under-
stand that Wollaston is merely describing virtue in terms of
truth. Virtue is as true as is the truth for it is as con-
formable to the nature of things, but it does not follow from
this that men live up to all the knowledge that they have.
“Things can be denied to be what they are by deeds,” says
Wollaston, which can only mean that he thinks that one can
fail to live conformany to the knowledge that one has.‘51

There are other critics of Wollaston who take the position
that the language of truth is inapplicable to the moral

“L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. II, p. 9.
-° ma, p. 10.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Della, p. 7.

 

110 The Ethics of William Wollaston

realm. Martineau says that intellectual relations do not
give us what we want in ethical enquiries. He says that the
understanding belongs exclusively to the unmoral world,
the world of science. “Fitness and congruity are ideas which
in themselves are by no means equivalent to moral concep-
tions. They have a broad usage.” To be sure “they have a
broad usage,” and, of course, they mean something just a
little different in each connection. But Martineau goes so
far as to say that these ideas, when applied to moral situa-
tions, have nothing to do with constituting it moral. He
says that Wollaston’s standard of morality, namely, “con-
formable to nature” does not constitute the ethical quality
of a moral act."2 His own system is so exclusively subjec-
tive, being that of Intuitionism, that he can see no good in
an objective principle. Antonio Aliotta says that it is
simply impossible to discuss morality with an intellectual
vocabulary. He says that Wollaston was one of those who
tried to interpret the moral life in terms of logic. He says
that Wollaston took the position that “the supreme law of
duty can be expressed in terms of logical relations.” Ali-
otta denies that this can be done on the ground that logical
relations have to do with the truth alone and so are inap-
plicable to the moral realm.53 Leslie Stephen agrees that
this criticism is applicable. He says that the difﬁculty that
underlies the reasoning of Wollaston is an obvious one. The
logical principle is not applicable to the moral realm but only
to the natural. He criticizes Wollaston on the score of hav-
ing introduced the unphilosophical idea of freedom, and then
straightway very inconsistently criticizes him on the ground
that he neglects to consider the signiﬁcant difference that
the will makes between factual and moral relations. We
might say A is A and then say that a denial of it would in-
volve contradiction, “but the proposition thou shall not
kill is a command addressed to the will, not a statement of
truth addressed to the intellect.” The attempt of Wollas-
ton “to bring the two kinds of propositions under the'same

" Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory, p. 471.
" Aliotta, La Reazione Idealistica Contra La Scienza—Subj ect Wol-
laston.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 111

category involves confusion fatal to the whole theory.”
Wollaston does not bring them under the same category,
thanks to his use of what Leslie Stephens characterizes as
the “unphilosophical idea of freedom.” 54

Another case of the confusion of intellectual and moral
truth is to be found in the article on Wollaston in Franck’s
dictionary of science and philosophy. Many of the sen-
tences are balanced sentences and the two conceptions of
truth are frequently found in the same sentence. It is
stated that Wollaston sought to deﬁne the idea of the good
and to prove that it may be resolved into the idea of the
true, but whether he thinks of this as purely abstract truth
or truth in the sense of true to all of life is not clear. “To
act conformany with truth is to act well; every bad action
is a lie.” 55 The ﬁrst part of the statement can be accepted,
if by truth be meant signiﬁcant life relations and this is
apparently the meaning. It does not follow from this that
“every bad action is a lie,” unless he means that acting im-
morally is “acting a lie,” which does not seem to be his
meaning. Wollaston does not reduce all immorality to ly-
ing, except in the sense that immoral acts are equivalent to
“acting a lie.” He says, in justiﬁcation of the phrase, that
a man may so live that “his whole conduct breathes un-
truth,” so, he asks, “may we not say that he lives a lie?” 56
The article continues: “Wollaston says that a person alters
truth by actions as by words.” This is certainly a mistaken
interpretation, for Wollaston insists that truth cannot be
altered but that assent to truth is determined. He does
say, however, that immorality is really as absurd as would
be the attempt to deny evident truth. The same thing can
be said of the statements in regard to the violation of con-
tracts: “To violate a contract is to deny it in action.”
Intellectually a contract cannot be denied but it can be
denied in action, by which Wollaston means that a man can
“practically” deny a contract, act as if he had made no con-
tract. Thanks to the fact that one’s will is free one can

“L. Stephen, En . Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. II, p. 7.

" Anon., Art. Wo aston, Francke Dict. Des Sciences Phil.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 11.

 

112 The Ethics of William Wollaston

act as if that which is were not, and as if that which is not,
were." The article goes on to say that, “Not to keep one’s
word is also to deny the promise made, to do the contrary of
that which one has promised.” Wollaston does not say that
one denies a promise by breaking a contract, for the fact
that one has made a promise is, according to Wollaston,
absolutely irrefragable. But one can “do the contrary,”
which would be just as contradictory as “to deny the prom-
ise made.” The one, however, is possible while the other is
impossible. The same misunderstanding of the relation of
the intellectual and the moral is evident throughout the ar-
ticle. For example, it is said that, “To disfigure truth
through one’s acts means necessarily to do evil.” “8 Yes, but
this does not mean what he says it does, namely, that the
disﬁguration of truth by an act of immorality is “the same
thing as to uphold a false proposition.” It is, however,
says Wollaston, “as contrary to the nature of things” as
would be the impossible attempt “to uphold a false propo—
sition.” 5" .

Irons says that Wollaston “obliterated all distinctions
between the moral and the rational.” In proof of this, Irons
says that he teaches that a rational being observes that
things bear certain relations to other things, and that
because of these evident natures and relations, thus ob-
served, he can discern certain moral relations. Reason,
therefore, not only enables men to ascertain what is true,
but also to recognize how they ought to act. Wollaston
makes the difference between moral good, and evil to be at
bottOm the same as the difference between true and false,
and since truth consists in recognizing things to be what they
are, virtue consists in “treating things as being what they
are.” He teaches, says Irons, that virtue is the practice
of truth, and vice, therefore, the practice of lying. But this
is not even a confusion of the two, and certainly not an oblit-'
eration of “all distinctions between the moral and the ra-

" Francke, Dic. Des Sciences Phil.—Art. Wollaston, p. 1728. Wol-
laston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 10. Clarke, Evidences, p. 188.

" Francke, Dic. Des Sciences Phil.—Art. Wollaston, p. 1728.

‘° Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 113

tional.” His quotation from Wollaston certainly does not
confuse the two: “A true proposition may be denied, or
things may be denied to be what they are, by deeds as well
as by express words.” 6° Irons says that “from Wollaston’s
standpoint the murder of a fellow being is merely an action
which denies an evident truth, namely, that the victim is a
fellow being.” He criticizes Wollaston on the ground that
he ought to express the heinousness of the crime in stronger
terms, but it must be remembered that he is speaking of im-
morality universally.61 Wollaston insists that there are
truths of very different values, and consequently degrees of
morality and of immorality.62 Irons continues: “From this
point of view, the standard of right and the criterion of truth
are the same.” “Since reason determines what ought to be
done, it must use its own criterion, namely, self-consistency.
. . . The distinction between right and wrong is therefore
the same as the distinction between true and false. A vicious
action is one which involves a contradiction.” “3 This, Irons
thinks, means that right action and correct thinking are es-
sentially identical. The truth is that Wollaston considers
them alike only in the respect that consistency and inconsist-
ency can be considered the norm in each. Wrong actions are
as inconsistent with reality, as contradictory therefore, as
false statements in regard to indubitable facts. The neces-
sary consequence of this position, Irons says, is that the
dynamic force which impels us to act rightly is the same as
that which makes us think correctly. The nature of things
does “impel” man to act morally or conformany to his rela-
tions, but since he is free he can act inconsistently. Man’s
intellect, on the other hand, is determined ;—the mind must
assent to necessary truth. This distinction Wollaston cer-
tainly does make.“

The criterion of morality, according to Irons, is not logi-
cal consistency but harmony with the possibilities of the

°° Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

‘1 Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Rev., vol. 12, pp. 138-9.

“’Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 23.

" Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Rem, vol. 12, pp. 139 ﬁ‘.

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 7-8 and 62 if. Irons, Rational-
ism in Mod. Eth., Phil. Rv., vol. 12, p. 140. ‘

 

114 The Ethics of William Wollaston

nature of the agent. Wollaston would answer that the na-
ture of the agent and his possibilities constitute important
factors, perhaps the most important, in the moral situation,
but logical consistency would still be the best formula of
morality. Morality is as consistent with the nature of
things as is the logical conformity of truth to the nature of
things. Irons says that Kant uses the criterion of truth
but that he “does not assert with the earlier rationalists that
a vicious action involves a contradiction. For to have
said that would have been to grant that the self-contradic-
tory can exist, which would be the same as admitting that a
square circle is a possible fact.” He says that Kant gets
around the absurdity, that Wollaston fell into, by saying
that wrong actions would be contradictory and absurd if
universalized.“ In reply to this I would say that Kant cer-
tainly does not mean that the particular immoral act is not
absurd and contradictory. He only says that we perceive
its contradictoriness by trying to think what would be the
inevitable consequences of its becoming a universal law. The
maxim which is implied in the breaking of a promise, for
example, “could never hold as a universal law of nature,
but would necessarily contradict itself.” The very point
of the rationalistic argument is that a particular wrong act
is as contradictory as would be the maxim on which it is
based becoming a universal law of nature.“

II. CRITICISM

THAT IMMORALITY, AS WELL AS MOBALITY CONFORMS
TO NATURE

The criticism that immorality aﬂirms things to be as they
are as truly as does morality, and that, consequently,
truth, or conformity to the nature of things, cannot consti-
tute a true criterion of morality is a criticism frequently
offered against the Ethics of Wollaston. This criticism is
very much like the one discussed in the preceding chapter.

“Irons, Rationalism in Mod. Eth., Phil. Rv., vol. 12, pp. 138-55.
" Kant, Meta. of Morals, Sec. II. Simmel, Einleitung in die Moral-
wissenschaft, vol. 2, ch. 5. Caird, Critical Phil. of Kant, bk. 2, ch. 2.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 115

That criticism is that Wollaston’s system is based on a con-
fusion of ethical and logical relations. Truth and falsity,
it is said, cannot be the diﬂ‘erentia of moral and immoral
because that would simply identify the very different cate-
gories of truth and goodness. The criticism with which I,
now, wish to deal is that truth is as much afﬁrmed by im-
morality as by morality, that we are conforming our ac-
tions to the natures of things just as truly when we do
wrong as when we ,do right, consequently a moral criterion
other than that of conformity to the nature of things must
be sought. Both criticisms are based on the same confused
interpretation of Wollaston, namely, that of failing to com-
prehend what he means when he says that truth can be denied
by deeds as truly as by words."

Selby-Bigge states well this objection to Wollaston’s cri-
terion of morality. He says that it is quite true that a moral
act “must not violate the physical laws of the universe, and
in this sense must be suitable to the nature of things,” but
“such violation would constitute folly rather than vice.”
And, furthermore, Selby-Bibbe says, that “an action which
was calculated with the most exact reference to physical
conditions might yet be a very‘bad one.” 63 Why should
suitable to the nature of things be restricted to the
physical laws of the universe? Is it not true that moral
laws also violate or conform to the nature of things? Wol-
laston makes it very clear that this is his meaning. He re—
alizes that both good and bad acts conform to physical
laws, but bad acts violate the real nature of things in that
they violate the nature of persons, which must be considered
of as much importance as physical things and for moral
purposes of supreme importance. His teachings on this
point are brought out most clearly, perhaps, in his cases
of bowing to a post and breaking a drinking glass.” To be
sure it is just folly to violate the laws of mere things, but
it is both folly and vice to violate the nature of personality.
That this is true is evident from the fact that Wollaston

"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.

" Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, p. XXXIV.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 15 and 31.

 

116 The Ethics of William Wollaston

never makes moral judgments except where persons are
involved. For him personality always constitutes one term
of the proposition or else it is not a moral judgment, and no
morality attaches to conduct unless it involves persons.
Martineau offers this same criticism in very much the
same form as Selby-Bigge. He says that good and bad
acts both conform to the nature of things. “These con-
ceptions are as applicable to the act of stabbing a man with
a dagger as in the blow that turns the dagger aside and
saves a life. Then, too, the act of the one is as conformable
to the character of the man as is the other.” 7° Janet takes
the same position: “Actions regarded as criminal do, in
reality, represent truth, just as truly as do honorable and
generous actions.” That a man can dispose of the lives of
his fellow creatures because of his strength and his passions,
is a perfectly true proposition. It is true that I can appro-
priate the property of others. These propositions are just
as true as are the. converse ones."1 The answer to these
criticisms of Martineau and Janet is very simple and evident.
True propositions are, of course, afﬁrmed by criminal acts,
but essential truths are violated by acts not conformable
to the nature of things. Wollaston says that truths are of
very different degrees of importance, and he says also that
that which determines the importance is human happiness
and welfare.72 Von Hartmann thinks that the principle is
far too broad because many things that are true cannot be
convertible into action, and even those special truths which
are convertible may still be morally speaking entirely indif-
ferent. He grants, however, that it is a true negative prin-
ciple of morality, because immorality is always in contra-
diction to truth. Wollaston never tries to prove that all
truth is of moral signiﬁcance in the sense that every intel-
lectual pr0position can be converted into moral actions.73
John Clarke says that we may grant that “every immoral
action denies some truth, . . . but then he must be forced

"° Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory, p. 472.

"Janet, Theory of Morals, p. 108.

"’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., Sec. I, Pr0p. IX.

" Von Hartmann, Phanomenologie des Sittlichen Bewusstseins, p. 344.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 117

to allow that every such action . . . does as well afﬁrm truth
as deny it.” He thinks that from this fact the conclusion
can be drawn that “let the action deny what truth you will,
yet since it affirms other truth, this is as sufﬁcient to bring
it under the denomination of virtuous.” 74 This is of course
true provided morality consists in mere affirmation of any
kind of truth, but this is not Wollaston’s view. John
Clarke says that he is not at all sure “that all immoral
actions deny more truth than they afﬁrm,” so it cannot, he
thinks, be argued that they are for that reason immoral."
As many truths, he thinks, could be afﬁrmed in regard to
“any species of vicious actions” as “could for the denial
of it.” In the first place, I would answer, it is not the posi-
tion of Wollastonthat immorality is just a denial of a true
proposition. In the second place, considering truth in the
broad sense as true to life relations and meanings, as Wollas-
ton does, John Clarke certainly cannot deny that vicious
actions are false. They are in conformity to some particu-
lar truths, to be sure, but they deny the larger truths of
the indissoluble unity of life and the world.76

The rationalistic system of Wollaston was criticized by
Hutcheson who said that moral distinctions must be re-
ferred not to the reason, but to an internal sense. He says
that one can make as many true propositions about a bad
action as about a good one, consequently moral laws must
be a good deal more than such truths. The criterion of
truth and the standard of right are different, otherwise
true propositions could not be made about wrong actions.
Hutcheson says that both virtuous and vicious actions con-
form to truth, and so truth cannot be the standard of
virtue." I am very sure that this is no refutation of
Wollaston, for it is his contention that only true proposi-
tions can be made about matters of fact. We can, how-
ever, act in a manner inconsistent with truth and thus
virtually deny, in practice, what we must assent to theoret-

"‘ J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Good, etc., p. 17.
" Ibid., p. 19.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 48-9 and 71.

"' Hutcheson, Essay on the Passions, Treatise 11, sec. 1.

 

118 The Ethics of William Wollaston

ically. Of course propositions that are true can be used
in describing or discussing evil actions, but this constitutes
no disproof of the thesis that evil is a denial of truth and
that goodness is an afﬁrmation of truth.78 We constantly
speak of men acting inconsistently, meaning thereby, just
what Wollaston means, that their actions are untrue, that
they are not living conformany to the true nature of
things. 'This does not mean that the truth element is by
any means all that there is to vice and virtue, nor does
Wollaston claim that it is. In fact he makes a great deal
of the volitional element, going so far as to insist that with-
out it there can be no morality. It is not moral truth until
we will the truth to be actualized in our lives."

Sir James Mackintosh made an objection to Wollaston’s
rationalistic method similar to that made by Hutcheson.
Sir James insists that the terms relation and conformity
to nature apply as much to vice as to virtue and that both
good and bad actions must conform to the natures and 'rela-
tions of things.80 Warlaw answers this objection by say-
ing that of course every act must in adapting means to
ends conform to the nature of particular things and rela-
tions. The vicious act of necessity conforms to the nature
of many particular things and relations, but it also vio-
lates the nature of things in many essential respects. The
virtuous act conforms universally. It is congruous with
its relations.81 ‘

Brown questions Wollaston’s criterion of morality on
the ground that both virtuous and vicious actions are con-
formable to the nature of things. He takes Wollaston’s
case of talking to a post. “Now, you see that on his scheme
of absolute irrelative truth, the absurdity of talking to a
post is precisely of the same nature with that of injuring
a man: For in both cases, we treat the post and the man,
as being what they are not. Consequently, on this philoso-
phy, if it be morally evil to injure a man it is likewise

7' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

" Ibid., p. 7.

3° Mackintosh, Dissertation on the Pragress of Ethical Phil.
'1 Warlaw, Christian Ethics, p. 306.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 119

morally evil to talk to a post.” Wollaston, he says, would
not claim this, of course, but since, according to his system,
truth is equally violated in either case and as there is some-
thing highly immoral in the one and nothing immoral in the
other this cannot be the criterion of morality.82 Saying
that all immorality is absurd and contradictory is very
different from saying that all absurdity and contradiction
constitutes immorality. It is the simple fallacy of conver-
sion. In the process of conversion an A proposition loses
its universality, and becomes only the particular proposi-
tion I. All immorality consists in absurdly denying a thing
to be what it is or in afﬁrming it to be what it is not. It
does not follow that every case of absurdity is immoral,
for many cases would be nothing more than stupid mistakes
or jokes. This Brown admits and argues from this that
Wollaston’s principle cannot constitute the criterion of
morality. A distinction must be made between error and
immorality. Error is only a false existential judgment,
and it is only when we act falsely that we are immoral.
No morality attaches to acts that do not violate the
nature of personality. Treating a post as a man, then, is
essentially different from treating a man as a post. There
is absurdity in both cases but not the same kind of ab-
surdity. Then, is not Brown right in saying that this is
resorting to another criterion of morality? N 0, because
in every moral situation personality must be involved, and
if it is a case of immorality it must be the nature of the
person rather than that of the thing that is violated.
Wollaston says that things have moral relations only when
attached to persons in some way.83 In spite of the denial
of John Clarke and Brown, it is also true that the intention
of the actor is a factor inrthe determination of the quality
of the act, in Wollaston’s system. In fact he makes it a
pre-condition of morality that the agent act intelligently
and freely.84 This certainly means that the intentions of

" Brown, Essays, p. 263. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 15.
' aWollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 15 and 97.

“ Ibid., p. 7. J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Moral Good,
etc., pp. 5-11.

 

120 The Ethics of William Wollaston

the agent are essential factors in making moral evalua-
tions.

Brown, then, proceeds to criticize Wollaston’s statements
in regard to the case of the man in distress. Wollaston’s
position is that to refuse to help a man in distress is to
deny the man’s distress to be what it is and personality to

be what it is.“5 “These strange denials we certainly do
not make,” Brown insists. I would answer that of course
we do not, nor does Wollaston claim that we do. He, in
fact, insists upon the point that as intelligent beings we
cannot deny the truth to be the truth. What we can do,
however, says Wollaston, is to act as if the truth were
not the truth or to “practically deny” what we theoretically
admit to be true.” Brown continues, “All which we tacitly
declare is, on the contrary, a truth, and a truth of the most
unquestionable kind.” To be sure we declare all of . these
things to be true, Wollaston would say, otherwise there
would be no morality attached to the situation. Brown
says that “We afﬁrm ourselves to be what we are, indif-
ferent to the miseries of others; and if to afﬁrm a truth
by our actions be all which constitutes virtue,” we have
acted as virtuously as we would have had we gone imme-
diately to the aid of the suffering man." This statement
of Brown’s is absurd because real truth is denied by such
action, and certainly one who acts in such a way acts con-
trary to the real nature of man.

In criticizing Wollaston, Jouﬂ'roy says, that, “In the
appreciation of actions we must come to judgments which
do not coincide materially with moral judgments. There is
no bad action which does not express, equally with a good
one, many true propositions.” The man who poisons an-
other conforms to many true propositions. To be sure he
does but he also contradicts true propositions and those
contradicted are the one’s essential to morality.88 There
are, says Wollaston, many true propositions which imply

“Brown, Essay II, Sec. 3. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 17.
I"Ibid., pp. 8 and 11.

" Ibid., p. 17. Brown, Essays, p. 965.

“Jouﬂ‘roy, Intro. to Ethics, vol. II, p. 886.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 121

no moral relations, since persons are not involved.89 It is
not, he says, immoral to speak to a post. True, this is
treating the post as a person, but it does not violate the
nature of personality.90 Jouffroy’s case of administering
arsenic Wollaston would treat in this way. The nature of
arsenic is not violated, but, in fact, many true propositions
are conformed to in the action, e. g., arsenic is poison, poison
will kill. The nature of the person, however, is violated and
many true propositions are thereby denied, the principal
one of which is that a person is a person and should always
be treated as such. So I cannot agree with J ouﬂ'roy, when
he says that Wollaston’s fundamental maxim is too com-
prehensive and confounds evil with good.

“There are,” says Jouﬁ'roy, “many truths which it is
morally indifferent whether we affirm or deny by actions.”
As a case he takes two cold men, one of whom draws near
a ﬁre while the other gets near a piece of ice. The act of
the one affirms a true proposition, which the act of the other
denies. But says J ouﬂ'roy, there is no morality in the action
of the ﬁrst man, nor immorality in the action of the second
man; but only reasonable action in the one case and foolish
action in the other. He says: “Absurdity and immorality
are not coincident.” 91 To this Wollaston agrees, but he
insists that immorality is absurd, not that every case of
absurdity is a case of immorality but that immorality is al-
ways absurd.92

Because absurdity and immorality are not coincident it
by no means follows that it is not the fundamental prin-
ciple of ethics, that moral actions are those which aﬂirm
true propositions and do not contradict the nature of
things. J ouffroy says that “when we meet a traveler in a
wood, it is equally a crime to maintain that his purse does
not belong to him, as to take it, for in either case we equally
deny the same true proposition.” 93 Of course we deny true
propositions in both cases, but the second case represents

1"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 31.

’° Ibid., p. 27.

“Jouﬁ‘roy, Intro. to Ethics, vol. II, p. 338.
"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 27.
"Jouﬂ'roy, Intro. to Ethics, p. 339.

 

122 The Ethics of William Wollaston

an action based on the denial of a true proposition and,
more important still, it represents a case of an action which
is in contradiction to the most important of all truths,
those concerning persons.“ J ouﬁ'roy further argues that
this moral principle would equalize virtues, “for if morality
consists in not denying a true proposition, then all good
actions are equally good, and no difference can be discov-
ered between them.” It is the essence of reason, he grants,
to respect essential relations and to act conformany thereto,
but it does not follow, he thinks, that because these rela—
tions constitute truth that they also constitute goodness.
Conduct may be reasonable without being virtuous and it
may be unreasonable without being wrong. “We are in
error, and act without conformity to the nature of things,
when we attempt to warm ourselves with ice; but such con-
duct is not immoral; the two spheres of absurdity and im-
morality do not coincide.” ’5

Wollaston does not, as I have just said, argue for the
coincidence of truth and goodness, but it by no means fol-
lows from this that the good cannot be best deﬁned in
terms of conformity to objective relations, to the nature of
things. The case just mentioned by Jouffroy as being
morally indifferent might very easily become a moral situa-
tion the moment the conformity or non-conformity to the
nature of things involved, not merely the nature of ﬁre
and the nature of ice, but that of sentient beings, and espe-
cially that of persons, the conduct would take on a moral
tone. Wollaston never claims that all relations are morally
signiﬁcant, and he certainly never contends that immorality
can be predicated of conduct that does not violate the
nature of sentient beings. He considers the inhumane treat-
ment of a lower animal and says it is wrong both because
it contradicts the sentient nature of the animal and also be-
cause the man who does such a thing violates his
own nature. The last factor is the signiﬁcant one because
no moral character can attach to conduct that does not
involve persons either as subject or object. He would have

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., See. I, Prop. IX.
"Joun‘roy, Intro. to Ethics, pp. 387-9.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 123

everything treated as what it is, although things are of very
different importance. One is, he thinks, mistreating his
mind when truth is disregarded.98

It is characteristic of rational beings, Irons says, to act
with due regard to the nature of things which is the same
as acting rationally, but this has no moral signiﬁcance. It
is, of course, true that we cannot say that all acts in con-
formity to the nature of things are moral acts, nor, even,

that all contradictions are immoral. It does not follow from y ,

this, as Irons thinks, that we have to seek elsewhere for our
moral criterion. He takes the position that if conformity
is to constitute the criterion of right, then “every act which
is performed by an intelligent being is right.” No, an A
. proposition does not distribute its predicate but only its
subject; consequently it does not follow that because the
right is always that which conforms to the truth, that the
truth is always moral and certainly not that every act of an
intelligent being will be moral. If Wollaston’s criterion
be true, says Irons, it follows that the murderer who takes
a life conforms his conduct as much to the nature of things
as does the good Samaritan who saves a life." This can-
not be said with truth for while the murderer does conform
to certain laws of physics his act virtually denies many
essential life relations and meanings. He acts, says Wollas-
ton, as if certain things which are true were not true.98
The act of the good Samaritan is quite different for it is
consistent with the true nature and relations of things. He
conforms not only to a few physical laws but to the very
nature of the universe, while the murderer’s act is in con-
tradiction to the greater truths of the universe and in con-
formity only to a few relatively insigniﬁcant physical laws.
As Wollaston expresses the matter, “In order to judge
rightly what anything is, it must be considered not only

. in one respect, but also what it may be in any other
respect; . . . the whole description of the thing ought to
be taken in. . . 4. All truths are consistent, nor can any-

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 15, 27 and 31.
" Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Rev., vol. 12, pp. 142-8.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 9.

 

124 The Ethics of William Wollaston

thing be true any further than it is compatible with other
things that are true.” 9"

The most absurd criticism passed upon Wollaston from
this point of view is that of Hume. In discussing judgments
“which are the effects of our actions, and which when false,
give occasion to pronounce the actions contrary to truth
and reason,” Hume makes the very clever assertion that
actions never cause judgments in our own minds but only
; in- the minds of others. Hume’s argument is very subtle
but is, I think, false. My wrong act, he argues, is based
on a true proposition, for I know the facts to be as they
are. He takes the case of someone seeing through a win-
dow the lewd behavior of a man with his neighbor’s wife.
The innocent spectator might suppose the woman to be
not the wife of a neighbor but the man’s own wife and so
might make a false judgment in regard to the situation.
“In this respect my action resembles somewhat a lie; only
with this difference, which is material, that I perform not
the action with any intention of giving rise to a false judg-
ment in another, but merely to satisfy my passion. I cause,
however, a mistake and false judgment by accident; and
the falsehood of its effects may be ascribed, by some odd
ﬁgurative way of speaking, to the action itself.” 10° In
reply, I will say, that the immoral, as Wollaston thinks of
it, always rests on a true judgment of the actor and it is
this which constitutes the differentia of the immoral from
the merely erroneous. The essence of immorality consists
in acting as if the known truth were not the truth. Wollas-
ton mentions a case very much like that of Hume, namely,
that of Isaac and Rebecca. In discussing this case Wollas-
ton says that a man may act a lie, and such acted lies are
such because there is a contradiction between the actions
and the evident truth of the situation.101

Hume, even, undertakes to refute Wollaston’s point in
regard to freedOm, saying that this does not clear up the
difﬁculty in regard to identifying goodness with truth be-

”Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., Sec. I, Prop. VI.
1'” Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 4-61.
mWollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 11.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 125

cause freedom does not explain how an action produces in
us an erroneous conclusion. He argues that, according to
Wollaston’s principle, if the man, who was having illicit
relations with his neighbor’s wife, had taken the precaution
to close the blinds there would have been no immorality
because in that case the action would have given rise to no
false propositions.102 Wollaston would answer that while
neither the man nor the woman were afﬁrming false proposi-
tions but true ones, factually speaking; yet, by their action,
they were denying true propositions. Intellectually they
could but assent to the truth of their natures and relations,
and yet practically they were denying the truth of those
natures and relations. All the while things were as they
were, and to that they could not refuse to give their assent,
but being morally free they could by action deny the truth,
that is act as if the truth were not the truth, but as if the
truth were quite otherwise.1°3

III. CRITICISM
THAT WOLLASTON OBSCURES THE REAL NATURE OF MORALITY

One very common criticism against Wollaston’s system is
that the real nature of morality' is obscured by his intel-
lectualistic criterion and that, consequently, no content is
given to morality. The criticism appears in several forms.
One set of critics simply say that it is an empty form and
that it is,‘ consequently, entirely useless as a guide to one
who is seeking the way to live morally. Others object to
the system simply because they have no faith in the intellect
as the criterion and guide of morality. They think that
the criterion is a moral sense or a moral faculty and that
reason is only a means to an end. This criticism is based
largely on an entirely wrong interpretation of Wollaston.
In the ﬁrst place this intellectualism is given an intution—
alistic interpretation, the good being made a matter of
simple and immediate intellection; while, as a matter of fact,
it is really an objective system of ethics based almost en-

1‘” Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 461.
1‘" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

 

126 The Ethics of William Woﬂaston

tirely on experience and ratiocination.1°‘ Then, too, his
notion that intellectual assent is necessitated, but that
moral acts are free is not properly evaluated.”5 We cannot
do otherwise than assent to what we think to be true. This he
makes to be the very corner-stone of his system, but his
critics say that it is a mere truism to say that we must
assent to the truth. It is a self-evident fact that an intelli-
gent being cannot deny intellectually what he knows to be
true, and that a free moral being can act contrary to the
recognized truth. That a thing should be treated as what
it is is as much a truism as are the primary laws of thought.
Wollaston sought to base Ethics on a foundation as in-
dubitable as that of logic. Just as surely as the fact that
A is A is the ethical truth that A should be treated as A.
But an intelligent being must be intelligent and assent to
truth, but he is under no compulsion in regard to acting
morally.'1°“ Immorality is as inconsistent as intellectual
contradiction, because the immoral person realizes that he
is acting on the assumption that something he knows to be
false is true or that something he knows to be true is false.
So the critics say that if this is all there is to the system
of Wollaston, then, his conception is self-evident but that
his system is purely formal.

Wundt says that the extreme intellectualism of Wollas-
ton’s system “almost entirely obscures the speciﬁc content
of morality (der speciﬁsche Inhalt des Sittlichen vollig zum
verschwinden kommt).”'1°7 If he objects to Wollaston’s
system on the ground that it does not give content to
morality. We might say that this same objection can be
made against any principle of morality. The content of
morality cannot be prescribed in any theory of morals.
Circumstances will largely determine the content of mo-
rality, and judgment must decide in the particular situations
of life just what is the right thing to do. An ethical ideal
can only guide the judgment and only a legalistic principle

1“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 28.
1°“ Ibid., pp. 7-8 and 42.

1°“ Ibid., p. 8.

1" Wundt, Ethik, p. 323.

 

l

Wollaston and His Critics 127

of morals can do more than this. Wollaston does, however,
‘ give copious suggestions as to the application of his prin-
ciples to the various kinds of situations of life.

Jouﬁ'roy says that he grants that a good act is never
false but is always in harmony with truth, that it is con-
formable with the relations resulting from the nature of
things. He thinks, though, that there are only “certain
relations which are moral, only certain true propositions,
which we are bound to express by our acts.” He says that
Wollaston’s system fails in that it does not give the dif-
ferentia of morality in such a way that one can know just
what acts are moral. He does not, Jouffroy says, diﬁ‘er—
entiate between moral and reasonable or between immoral
and unreasonable. The defect of his system is, Jouffroy
thinks, “conﬁrmed by the fact that the psychological coin-
cidence is equally wanting with the external coincidence.”
He grants that we do ﬁnd it necessary, oftentimes, to con-
sider both our own nature and the nature of other beings
and the relations existing between them and ourselves be-
fore we can decide What we ought to do. This, he says, is
to enable us to ascertain what is good and what we ought
' to do.108 This is Wollaston’s position only he contends that
this is all that is needed to determine what ought to be done
in any situation of life. Wollaston’s criterion is an ob-
jective one. He says: “Just let things speak for them-
selves,” which means that we are to ﬁnd out What things
are and then treat them accordingly.109 Jouffroy, unlike
Wollaston, thinks that there must be some speciﬁc moral
principle.110 .

If all truth be so very sacred, says John Clarke, that
men should have regard for it in all their conduct and if
vice consists entirely in its opposition to truth, it follows
that “the afﬁrming of truth, any truth whatever by word
or deed . . . should be looked upon as a virtue.” He,
then, attempts a reductio ad absurdum argument. He says
that sillyidle consequences follow from such a view. The

1o"Jouifroy, Intro. to Ethics, pp. 836-8.
1' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
1“’Jouifroy, Intro. to Ethics, p. 839.

 

128 The Ethics of William Woﬂasto-n

afﬁrmation of every truth becomes a duty. He says, “it
will be a glorious exercise for a man to spend his time in
thrumming over such worthy and weighty propositions as
these, a man’s no horse, a horse no cow, a cow no bull, nor
a bull an ass.” 1“ Mr. Wollaston’s general idea of moral
good and evil cannot be a true conception, thinks John
Clarke, “because it does not rest upon the tendency, wherein
precisely the moral good or evil of human actions consists;
and besides . . . it is hardly applicable to any species of
human actions, except those of afﬁrming or denying truth
by words.” He says that, “To pretend that cruelty and
injustice is denying a man to be a man,” is nothing but
“mere rant,” borrowed from a hyperbolical way of aggra-
vating the absurdity of such behavior, without ever strictly
meaning what is said.” '1”

John Clarke says that, “‘He everywhere speaks of own-
ing things to be as they are, as in itself a matter of the
highest importance, as the ne plus ultra, beyond which no
man needs or ought to go in his enquiries, what is ﬁt or
pr0per to be done or not . . . as if that alone was a thing
desirable in and for itself.” This Clarke says “is a con-
tradiction to the common sense and experience of mankind.
For a little reﬂection may quickly satisfy anyone that noth-
ing but pleasure or happiness is or can be desirable upon
its own account, without reference to anything else. And
that other things are desirable and pursued by us, only so
far as they are considered by us to be the means of attain-
ing pleasure or happiness. . . . Happiness, in short, is the
ultimate end of all our aims and designs, all our wishes and
desires. This . . . we constantly and steadily pursue. Nor
can it be otherwise. And for the truth of this I appeal to
the inward feeling and experience of all mankind.” 1‘13
Clarke says that Wollaston practically admits this, when
he says that “pain considered in itself, isa real evil; pleasure
a real good. . . . Pleasure is in itself desirable, pain to be

1“ J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Moral Good, p. 19.

m Ibid., p. 56.
1” Ibid., pp. 46-7.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 129

avoided.” 1“ Clarke says that “owning things to be what
they are” is not in itself desirable, but “desirable” only “as
. . a means, more or less conducive to the end of all our
wishes and desires, happiness.” 11‘

John Clarke accuses Wollaston of insisting that things
be treated as they are “without regard to consequences.” 11"
But, as a matter of fact, Wollaston is very insistent upon
the fact that things cannot be treated as they are without
entering into a consideration of possible consequences, espe-
cially as to human happiness. Clarke says that Wollaston
talks like one who is a stranger to human nature when he
speaks as if happiness were a “matter of secondary con-
sideration to abet the practice of truth.” He says that
instead of the Author of Nature appointing happiness “to
encourage the practice of truth,” the “regard due to truth

. is purely and solely with a view to the well-being and
happiness of mankind.” 1" This, of course, Wollaston does
not deny but he insists that welfare and happiness are what
is meant by truth of ethical signiﬁcation. The essential
difference between an objective system of morals, like that
of Wollaston, and a view of morals, which makes the right-
ness or wrongness to depend upon the intentions entirely,
is that consequences, in so far as they can be anticipated,
are duly considered. The consequences expected to result
from an action is the determining factor in the motivation
when conduct is objectively evaluated. It would certainly
be the height of irrationality to disregard consequences.
While Wollaston considers happiness to be a matter of the
highest importance and insists that nothing can be really
good which makes for the destruction of human happiness,
he would not go as far as John Clarke when he says that
“mankind, neither are, nor can be concerned for anything
but happiness. . . . Owning things to be what they are, or
a conduct conformable to truth, can signify nothing to

‘1‘ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 85.

1" J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Moral Good, etc., p. 48.
’1‘ Ibid., p. 48.

“' Ibid., p. 48.

 

130 The Ethics of William Wollaston

mankind any further than it is a means to promote their
happiness.” “3

Hume says that no conclusion as to the nature of virtue
can be drawn from the mere aSsertion that “we perceive an
act in certain relations to be virtuous or vicious,” nor can
we say what faculty perceives the relation. It may be
granted that the same act in the same relation is always
virtuous or vicious, “if relations be taken in the widest
possible sense, but,” says Hume, “that is a barren proposi-
tion.” 119 To be 'sure it is barren in the sense that it does
not state the content of morality, but to give deﬁnite and
ﬁxed content to morality is legalism. N o ethical theory
undertakes to give the speciﬁc content of morality. It is
true that some of the intuitionists say that certain acts are
always and everywhere virtuous or vicious in all relations,
e. g., telling the truth and keeping faith. Wollaston thinks
that even these are but instrumental or the mere means to
the realization of personality and that there are circum-
stances when to be true to real relations would involve
breaking a covenant or the violation of some other general
moral rule. He would say that no particular thing is al-
ways right or wrong. It is, he says, generally right to tell
the truth but there are occasions, when the telling of truth
would contradict truths more important to humanity than
merely verbal lying. To “merely deny truth by words . . .
is not equal to a denial by facts.” He says that “all sins
against truth are not equal, and certainly a little trespass-
ing upon it in the present case, for the good of all parties,”
and where humanity demands it, is justiﬁable.12°

After Von Hartmann’s long quotation from Garve, which
he thought to be Garve’s translation of Wollaston, in which
he gives cases of morality explicated in terms of the criterion
of truth, he makes this criticism: “Aside from the partial
inaptitude of this concrete exposition there appears, at ﬁrst
sight, a forced and artiﬁcial nature in the whole mode of

113J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Moral Good, etc., p. 51.

m Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 469. Selby-Bigge, British
Moralists, p. XXXV.

m Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 30.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 181

action.” 121 I understand Von Hartmann to mean that
when Wollaston says “that to make a slave of a man is the
same as to say: dieser Mensch ist ein verounftloses Wesen,
which I can treat as horses and oxen,” that he understands
him to merely assert that a man is a creature without feel-
ing and that he does not at all show wherein the wrongness
consists. He says that Wollaston presupposes that every
action is consciously a logical consequence of certain pre-
mises and that the consciousness of the immorality of the
action consists in the consciousness of the fallaciousness of
one or more of the premises. “To tell the truth, however,
an action,” says Von Hartmann, “hardly ever comes about
in the manner here supposed, and Where this is really the
case and the fallaciousness of one of the premises really
enters into consciousness, this theoretical consciousness is
only an incidental circumstance and no how identical with
the consciousness of the immorality of the action.” 122

Von Hartmann says that there is nothing in the system
of Wollaston which is not ‘a truism and gives that as the
explanation of its unfruitfulness and for the fact that it
had little inﬂuence on subsequent systems. At the very
most the demand of objective reasonableness, the moral prin-
ciple of truth, is an inadequate solution of the problem, for
it only teaches us how to avoid wrong and directs us to the
fight path for the solution of the problem.’23 I would an-
swer that Wollaston’s principle is supposed to be accept-
able to all rational beings. It is supposed to be as in-
dubitable as the laws of thought, and this I suppose, is the
pre—condition of its being true. Wollaston, everywhere, in-
sists that reasonableness of principle coincides with objec-
tive reasonableness. He, everywhere, pre—supposes that act-
ing rationally means the same as acting in conformity to
the nature of things.124

Falckenberg makes a similar criticism to that of Von
Hartmann: “The course of moral philosophy has passed

1" Von Hartmann, Phanomnologie des Sittlichen, etc., p. 345.
1"Ibid., p. 845.

1" Hartmann, Phﬁnomnologie des Sittlichen Bewusstseins, p. 845.
"‘ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., See. I, Paragraph V.

 

132 The Ethics of William Wollaston

over the Ethics of Clarke and Wollaston as an abstract and
unfruitful idiosyncrasy.”L25 Of course Ethics must be
abstract in principle, for how else could it be universal
and ideal? And if by unfruitful he means lacking in con-
creteness, I would answer that the content of morality can
be as easily supplied to this as to any other system of
Ethics. It can, in fact, be supplied more easily because
the natures and relations, the conformity to which consti-
tutes morality, determine the speciﬁc content of morality.
Falckenburg, however, says this of the effort to ﬁnd an
objective and universal standard in place of the subjective
and individual standard of the school of Hedonism; that
while these thinkers had plans greater than their per-
formance still “the search for an ethical norm which should
be universally valid and superior to the individual will did
not lack justiﬁcation.” L2"

Leslie Stephen characterizes Wollaston’s system as In-
tuitionism. “He tried to argue from our a priori knowledge
of the essence of the divine and human nature, and not from
the a posteriori experience of their relations.” He says
that this eﬂ'ort of Wollaston represents an attempt to use
a method belonging to the theological stage of thought.
The a priori method, he says, could be used appropriately
in a system of theological Ethics. A set of rules inde-
pendent of experience might be deduced from the belief in an
omnipotent ruler, for given such a Supreme Being “it was
easy to infer what should be the conduct of his creatures.”
But Leslie Stephen thinks that this method is inapplicable
when for the God of traditional theology is substituted the
“conception of a supreme nature.” 1‘27 I agree entirely with
him that the doctrine of an infallible conscience must go
with the giving up of the doctrine of a personal God. I
do not, however, agree with his characterization of Wollas-
ton’s system as intuitional. Stephen says that “the nuga-

”' Falckenberg, His. of Modern Phil., p. 190.

"'Ibid., p. 190.
1" Leslie Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. II, p. 8.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 183

tory character of Clarke’s system appears in the curious
development given to it by Wollaston.” He says that
Clarke “wished to elevate morality into the sphere of pure
mathematics where the promptings of passion and the les-
sons of experience should be entirely excluded.” He thinks
that Wollaston’s development from Clarke is in the direc-
tion of considering absolute and abstract logical truth as
the criterion of morals. I cannot think this to be a true
interpretation. I think that Wollaston did develop from
the position of Clarke, but not in the direction of Intui-
tionalism. The development was towards a more completely
rationalistic position, or, perhaps, it would be better to say
that it was a development in the direction of a more purely
rationalistic position. Clarke thought that the reason is an
all-sufﬁcient moral guide but thought that revelation was
necessary to reveal the sanctions of morality, without which
the majority would not have strength enough to do that
which their reason prescribes. Wollaston thought revela-
tion to be entirely unnecessary.128

I cannot reconcile Leslie Stephen’s statement that “he
refused to interrogate nature, in order to discover what is
pleasing to the God of nature,” with Wollaston’s injunction
to “just let things speak for themselves and they will pro-
claim their own rectitude or obliquity.” 129 Wollaston can
only mean by this that the nature of things determine moral
obligation. I am very sure that Leslie Stephen is wrong
in thinking that Wollaston bases all truth upon intuition.
He says that Wollaston’s system was based upon an ob—
jective basis but claims that this objective truth is deduced
intuitively.”m The only ground for this interpretation is
the fact that Wollaston believed that there is a rational
factor in knowledge and in morality. In regard to the
rational and necessary factor in morals, Wollaston only
said that it is necessarily true and so can be known
a priori, that one’s acts should conform to the truth of

”‘ Anon. Art, Wollaston, Chambers’ Ency., vol. 16, p. 709.
1"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
1’"L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. II, p. 9.

 

184 The Ethics of William Wollaston

things. As to what things are and our relations thereto, that -
belongs to the a posteriori, the empirical factor.181

J odl thinks that Wollaston’s moral criterion is not ulti-
mate. He does not believe that even Wollaston himself is
guided by such a relative standard. He says that accord-
ing to such a method there can be no absolute distinction
between good and evil, “because it nowhere leaves the neigh-
borhood of relativity.” J odl characterizes Wollaston as
a symptomatic moralist, “sympotmatische Ethiker” by
which he meant that Wollaston really resorted, in the last
analysis, to a higher ethical standard and that conformity
to nature was not his criterion but only a symptom of the
ethical. Jodl says that he did not deny the inﬂuences of
religion and that he believed that the human being is de-
pendent upon “another of endless goodness.” Jodl says
that Wollaston believes that “from this source as well as
from the unity of all individuals arise the virtues of piety
and justice, of kindness and sobriety in connection with
the Golden Rule of the gospel.” 132 _

In connection with his exposition of the ethical teachings
of Hume, Von Gizycki takes occasion to offer a criticism
of the ethical system of Wollaston. He thinks that Wollas-
ton was the most consistent thinker of his school, but he
agrees with Hume that his method was artiﬁcial and that
he was guilty of reasoning in a circle. He says that
“Wollaston’s doctrine has the relative merit to have ex-
pressed with naive frankness the actual consequences of
this entire tendency.” 1‘33 He understands this to be purely
formal Intellectualism. '

In his exposition of the Ethics of Home of Kames, Norden
gives some consideration to the Ethics of Wollaston. He
agrees with Lord Kames in his estimation of Wollaston.
Norden characterizes his Ethics as resting on an autonom-
ous foundation, “autonomer Grundlage,” and he agrees with
Kames that this is an impossible foundation upon which to
rest a system of Ethics. It may be said that, as a matter

mWollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 49 ﬂ“.
mJodl, Ethik, p. 145 if.
1" Von Gizycki, Ethik Hume, p. 7.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 185

of fact, Wollaston did not believe that Ethics could rest
on an “autonomer Grundlage,” but, rather, that he was
very insistent upon the fact that morality must be made to
depend upon real objective relations. Lord Kames’ system
is also objective in a sense. He says that “any action con-
formable to the common nature of the species, is considered
by us as regular and good.” This, “common nature . . .
every person . . . who is not a monster possesses. It is
ﬁt and proper . . . and it is a beautiful scene to ﬁnd crea-
tures acting according to their nature.” 13‘ Kames, like
Wollaston, says that the moral rule “by which‘we ought to'
regulate our actions” is that of “acting according to nature,
acting so as to answer the end of our creation.” Kames,
however, differs very greatly from Wollaston in regard to
the way we discover what is and what is not conformable
to nature. He thinks that we have a moral sense, for he
says “thus we ﬁnd the nature of man so constituted, as to
approve certain actions and to disapprove others; to con-
sider some actions as ﬁt, right and meet to be done, and to
consider others as unﬁt, unmeet and wrong.” 135 Norden
and. Kames agree that Wollaston is right when he makes
morality to consist in a life conformable to nature but .
wrong in that he “puts reason in the place of feeling.” It
can be said that their interpretation of Wollaston makes
him an intuitionalist rather than a rationalist. It may be
also said that Kames and N orden believe in an “autonomer
Grundlage” and that their Ethics is really intuitionistic,
for a moral sense as truly as an innate idea of morality is
equivalent to an intuition. Norden agrees with the conten-
tion of Kames that Wollaston’s reduction of all immorality -
to the lie is unnatural and forced. He also agrees that
Wollaston is- guilty of the fallacy Petitio Principii. “Why,”
asked Kames, “is theft a lie?” He answers, “Of course
because the thief has obliterated the distinction between
mine and thine. But what is meant by this is mine? N oth-
ing but: I have a right to that particular one, and it is
therefore wrong if someone else robs me of it. So the idea

1" Norden, Die Ethik Henry Home of Kames, pp. 27-8.
1“ Kames, Essay on the Prin. of Morality, Brit. Moralists, 300 ff.

 

‘“#'**—‘AA*‘—b—A—J%d‘_mhg-.‘_.“ :- --j—A
M

186 The Ethics of William Wollaston

of right and wrong are here already presupposed.” He
says that what is said of theft may be said of other vices;
we know that they are wrong immediately. Norden says
that one would naturally expect for Wollaston to tell why
the lie is immoral but he does not do so. “He has,” says
Norden, “left it to everybody’s conviction, with the same
right, however, he could have left the other vices to our
inner conviction (unserer inneren Uberzengung).” 13°
Kames goes so far as to say that: “To maintain that the
qualities of right and wrong are discoverable by reason is
no less absurd than that truth and falsity are discoverable
by the moral sense.” 13"

Von Hartmann thinks that Wollaston used the criterion
of truth in a purely formal way. Von Hartmann, however,
accepts truth as his own standard of morality, but supposes
that he is using it in a very much broader sense than did
Wollaston. This is not, by any means, the case, for “truth
to all of life” and not just formal truth is certainly Wollas-
ton’s idea of morality. He thought that Wollaston’s use
of truth is quite other, so, he says: “If we ask what remains
of the moral principle of truth when we have removed the
erroneous presupposition upon which it rested with Wollas-
ton we ﬁnd the demand for the objective reasonableness of
our actions for which a criterion other than that of Wollas-
ton’s formal theoretical principle must be sought.” And
we ﬁnd, also, “that all moral laws and ethical rules are com-
prised in their systematic connection in the principle of
truth.” This does not mean that every individual act can
show in all cases harmony with individual truth, which he
thinks to be Wollaston’s idea; theory and practice are far
too independent for that, and besides our entire knowledge
of the phenomenal world may not sufﬁce to form the basis
of absolute morality. In fact, he says, only that theoretical
knowledge is capable of this “which leads beyond the phe-
nomenal world to the reality revealing itself in it, that is

1a"Norden, Die Ethik Henry Home of Kames, p. 29. Kames, Essays
on the Prin. of Morality, Brit. Moral., 306.
1” Home, Sketches.

 

 

Wollaston and His Critics 187

metaphysics.” 138 So, Von Hartmann says, “if one under-
stands by truth . . . the true metaphysical knowledge,
then Wollaston’s principle receives a signiﬁcance, of course,
far from being recognized by Wollaston himself,
namely that true Ethics can be based only on true meta-
physics.” 139

IV. CRITICISM
THAT THE NATURE or VIBTUE Is NOT DEFINED BUT ASSUMED

There is another criticism which has frequently appeared
to the system of Wollaston, namely, that he does not deﬁne
the nature of virtue but merely assumes it. Those who
make this type of criticism are, as a general thing, those
who hold either the view that virtue is sui genesis or else
that it is based on feeling. If one believes that the criterion
of morals is an inner sense or an intuition, which is imme—
diate and indubitable requiring neither experience nor ratio-
cination, it follows, of course, that any attempt to state a
moral ideal, in rational terms is a gratuitous procedure.
The same, of course, can be said of the view of the world
that would make morality a matter of feeling.

This criticism was ﬁrst offered by the contemporary
ethical writer, John Clarke,”0 who asked: “But supposing
actions rightly denominated immoral did really imply a
denial of truth, . . . a denial of things to be what they are;
yet how will it follow from such a denial, that those actions
therefore are truly and properly immoral, that is contrary
to the will and good pleasure of God, declared by thevoice
of reason, or the light of nature?” For this,- he says,
Wollaston offers several reasons. Clarke goes on to say
that “the difﬁculty of making a determination will grow
with the number of signiﬁcations the same action may have
. . . to different people.” The “civility of a sharper,” for

1" Hartmann, Phﬁnomonologle des Sittlichen Bewusstseins, p. 345.
“’ Ibid., p. 346.
“J. Clarke, Exam. of Wollaston’s Notion of Good, etc., p. 19.

 

138 The Ethics of William Wollaston

example, makes a very different impression upon a green-
horn to that made upon a man of the world.

Selby-Bigge is rather typical of those who make this
criticism. He says that “relation” can only be used
“ﬁguratively” in morals. He says: A “good deal of the
intellectualist argument turns upon merely verbal ambig-
uity; relation, agreement, congruity, suitableness, ﬁtness
form a series which lead, conveniently but loosely, from the
non-moral to the moral.” These terms are meaningless,
Selby-Bigge thinks, except when thought of in connection
with happiness or some other end without which they have
no moral connotation. Abstract conformability of actions
to things “is certainly not sufﬁcient to constitute virtue,
and it is impossible to give a deﬁnition of virtuous conform-
ability without including in the deﬁnition the idea of
virtue.” 1‘1 Conformity of life to the nature of things does,
it seems to me, deﬁne morality as clearly as does any other
ideal of morality. Any ideal must be stated in an abstract
and formal way, or else it will not be universal and conse-
quently not an ideal at all. The content always comes from
experience and involves moral judgment. It is a stock argu-
ment and has been offered against many ethical systems
that another criterion is implied in the very statement of
the ideal. Intellectualists can certainly use it as effectively
as can any other school, for they all presuppose the uni-
verse to be consistent and so must think of morality as acts
that cohere with the rest of things. So can we not say that
the other ethical systems all presuppose the idea of con-
sistency? Wollaston does, in fact, do just that thing with
happiness when he says that no one can refuse to consider
happiness as what it is for it is a part of the real nature
of man.”2 ‘

In criticism of Wollaston, Rogers says that to say that
right action is reasonable or natural appears to mean little
more than that it is reasonable and natural to do what is
right. Rogers says that these moralists, Clarke and Wollas-
ton, constantly insisted upon the fact that moral and scien-

“1 Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, p. XXXIII.
“‘ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 37.

 

 

Wollaston and His Critics 189

tiﬁc truth have the same rational characteristics in order
to show that all truths are universal and ob jective.‘43 Say-
ing that it is reasonable and natural to do what is right does
not preclude the idea of reasonableness and naturalness as
the standard of what is right, nor does the belief that moral
truth is as universal, as rational, and as objective as scien-
tiﬁc truth preclude the possibility of morality being essen-
tially another kind of thing from intellectual truth?“

Martineau agrees with Wollaston that morality cannot
rest on the senses. “But the next step,” he says, “I ﬁnd
impossible to take; I cannot say that this exclusion from
the category of sense drives the moral insight into that of
the understanding.” He thinks that there is a middle
ground between sense and intellect. He believes that there
are “intuitive rules of the will,” which present themselves
to us not as “theoretical disclosure” but as a “practical
imperative.” The moral consciousness does not present it-
self to us as “so it is” but as “so it ought to be.” 1‘45 Very
true, but it is an intellectual matter and is based on the real
nature of things empirically and rationally arrived at. I
cannot believe that there is any middle ground between sen-
sationalism and rationalism in morals. Wollaston recon—
ciles the empirical and rational factors in knowledge and
says that both experience and ratiocination have a part in
determining what our duty is.146 A true intellectualism
will also treat the entire sense life as good when properly
controlled by intelligence.147

Hume says of Clarke and Wollaston: “They thought it
sufﬁcient if they could bring the word relation into the argu-
ment without troubling themselves whether it was to the
purpose or not.” He thinks that it is an incorrect theory
of morals which places virtue and vice in relations, because
if the virtue of an act is a relation, then “all relations dis-
coverable by reason obtain as much between inanimate ob-

1" Rogers, Short His. of Ethics, p. 151.

1“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.

1“ Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory, p. 478.
‘“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 43.

1" Ibid., p. 45.

 

14o . The Ethics of William Wollaston

jects or animals, as between persons.” 1‘8 No, Wollaston
would reply, the same kind of relations cannot obtain be-
tween mere things and animals as obtain between persons
and things, persons and animals, and persons and persons.
The correlatives have considerable to do with the determina-
tion of the relations. Wollaston takes the position that
breaking drinking glasses is different from breaking heads
and that treating a post as a man is diﬂ'erent from
treating a man as a post. He says in effect that a
person must be one of the correlatives in moral relations.“19

Hume denies that there is any such thing as a moral rela-
tion. I understand Wollaston to take the same position.
It is not the relation itself that determines whether the
situation be moral or non-moral but the things related. An
act of man is moral, immoral or non-moral according to its
conformity to the real nature of things, including persons
and God. I cannot see the force of the criticism that this
leaves the nature of the moral relation unexplained and that
the standard of morality is either assumed or still to be
found.15° Hume says that there must be an “oughtness
relation” in order for morality to be a matter of relations.
And he thinks, also, that this relation must be perceived
by a different kind of reason.151 This objection is based
on a misunderstanding of Wollaston, namely, in regard to
the distinction between existential and moral judgments.
The different thing involved in the moral relation,gthe thing
that can convert almost any factual relation into a moral
relation, is the clear recognition by a moral agent of the
nature and relations of things and of his relation thereto.
Morality, then, from this point of view, is just the form of
action which devolves upon. us because of the relation of
ourselves to the rest of things, because of the indissoluble
unity of life and the world.152

Hume says that the person who takes the property of
another does in a manner declare it to be his own. “This

1" Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 464.

1" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 27 and p. 15.
1” Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 464.

“1 Ibid., p. 467.

”' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 50—1.

 

Wollaston a/nd His Critics 141

falsehood is the explanation of injustice, but these notions
of property right and obligation presuppose an antecedent
notion ’of morality.” Wollaston’s explanation only shows
why any wrong act is wrong, but what wrong itself is, that,
Hume says, is presupposed. So he is driven back to answer
the question why truth is virtuous and falsity vicious.”3
In answer I will say that Wollaston did not say that truth
is virtuous or falsity vicious, but only that virtuous acts
are acts which are conformable to true natures and rela-
tions.154 '

Janet says that if there were in nature only factual rela-
tions, “relations of parts to whole, of orders, species, law
and phenomena, there would be mathematical, logical, and
physical sciences, but there would be no moral sciences.” I
cannot see that Ethics requires relations other than these,
or rather that these, when related to human lives, become
ethical relations. Janet follows Malebranch in saying that
moral science implies that there are between things “rela-
tions of perfection, of dignity, and excellence. . . . It is
because one thing is better that it is our duty to prefer it.”
Janet says that the idea “good implies that there is between
things or attributes, an order of quality distinct from the
order of quantity, whether mathematical or logical. If you
suppress the quality of things, you suppress all that renders
one thing more estimable than another.” 155 The moral
judgment is certainly a quality judgment, but is this quality
not determined by relations of truth? But Janet says that
“if you refuse to accept an objective hierarchy of goods,
nothing remains but a subjective scale of pleasures.”
Wollaston agrees that this is the case. He is as insistent
as Janet upon the belief that a true system of Ethics must
be objective. He believes that there is “an objective
hierarchy of goods” but thinks that these are constituted
by the real relations of things and persons and that all
relations are capable of becoming moral relations.15" The

“’ Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 462.
1““Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 9.
1"Janet, Theory of Morals, p. 109..

m Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 93.

 

142 The Ethics of William Wollaston

mere mathematical, logical and physical become moral when
human lives become involved with them. There are between
things “relations of perfection, of dignity, and of excel—
lence,” but this does not mean that one thing is per se better
than another, that all depends entirely upon circumstances
and relations. Shakespeare has one of his characters say:
“I perceive that there is nothing good without respect.”
Janet continues: “Truth in general comprises, then, all
kinds of objective relations: good concerns only relations
of perfection.” “‘7 To this‘ Wollaston would agree pro-
vided he means that there can be morality only when human
ideals and human volitions are involved. Wherever these
are involved we have “relations of perfection,” in addition
to the mathematical, the logical and the physical relations.
It is not true that there are any things that are always and
everywhere good or had, only their relations to human lives
constitutes them good or bad.158

Janet grants that when the question is pushed back into
metaphysics the good and the true become the same kind
of eternal relations. “Can it, then, be said that the good
and the true have not mutual and profound afﬁnities, or
even that they do not ﬂow from a common source? The
good and the true, which are separate in human vision, must
mingle at their source. From the same origin comes the
being and the goodness of things.” He agrees with Descartes
that God is the author of eternal verities. The ideal for
man is not, Janet says, something foreign to him, but “it
is his own essence. Being born a man, he ought to try to
be a man so far as is possible.” To do this often involves
a struggle between a man’s larger self with his narrow in—
dividual self. “But the individual himself has a distinct
essence which he should respect.” This, he says, is our
author’s view and it is also Kant’s idea. It is the view that
attributes to the human personality an intrinsic worth, an
absolute value. Janet admits that it is this worth of per-
sonality which must constitute the relations of perfection,
dignity, and excellence, but he does not seem to realize the

1" Janet, Theory of Morals, p. 110.
1" Ibid., p. 31.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 143

implication of his admission.159 Consistency would demand
that he recognize that there is no great difference between
Wollaston’s philosophy and his own. He makes the good to
consist in the coordination of all ends, which is precisely
Wollaston’s view, who is very insistent on the point that all
relations must be considered.160 But still Janet speaks of
morality as if it were sui genesis saying that good and per-
fection are ends for man, and, he says, “it would be more
exact todeﬁne the end as being the good, than the good as
being the end.”

Garve says that this system of Wollaston would be one
of the most complete if it were not too metaphysical for use,
and if a moral philosophy is to set forth only the nature
of an already accepted virtue and not also the origin and
development of virtue in human nature. Garve says that
people had ideas of virtue long before any such criterion, as
conformity to nature, was proposed. So instead of this
being the true and original idea, it is rather a derived and
artiﬁcial formula to which they attach their original and
natural conception of virtue.161 I think that Garve has
a wrong conception of the task of Ethics. I understand
Ethics to be a normative science, the business of which is
to evaluate human conduct, which it must do in the light
of an ideal or criterion of morality. The natural history
of morals is a most interesting and enlightening study, but
it belongs rather more to psychology and anthropology than
to ethics. Garve criticizes Wollaston, also, on the ground
that “no man in acting morally or immorally is conscious
of making any such speculation in regard to the moral judg-
ment of his action. He says that it is not the testimony of
moral consciousness that his conscience accuses him of noth-
ing but lack of veracity, when it accuses him of unjust and
treacherous actions, and that accords approval for chari-
table and beneﬂcent acts only because he has expressed true
propositions thereby.” Garve says that since this is true
we must look elsewhere for a criterion for what does not

1" Janet, Theory of Morals, p. 111.

a"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.
1“ Garve, Ubersicht der vornehmsten Prin. der Sittenl., p. 171.

 

144 The Ethics of William Wollaston

really move man to virtue can also not be the human prin-
ciple of virtue, “Was aber keinen Menschen zur Tugend
wirklich bewegt, das kann auch nicht das menschliche Prin-
cipi der Tugend sein.” “2 Now, as a matter of fact, Wollas-
ton does not say that one makes such speculations at the
moment of action. He only says that a bad man in acting
in a manner unsuitable to the nature and relations of things
is acting in a contradictory manner. He is not, according
to Wollaston, making false existential judgments, but his
actions are as false as such judgments.163

Brown thinks that this system is dependent upon some
other for the determination of virtue and vice. He says:
“If we had no previous notions of moral good and evil, no
‘- love of the happiness of others more than their misery, it
would be absolutely impossible to determine whether virtue
or vice were truth or falsehood.” If we make the presup-
position or take for granted that it is the true nature of
the child to love its parents, Brown says, that, of course,
we can say that when the child acts tenderly in its dealing
with its parent, that it “treats the parent according to his
true nature,” and that if his treatment were unkindly, that
“he would not be treating his parent according to his true
nature, but as if he were a foe, to whose true nature such
usage would be accordant.” So, Brown says, that Wollas-
ton takes virtue for granted in the conception of true nature.
He thinks that this principle is worthless and that it really
implies another criterion of virtue, namely, that of Intui-
tionism. Immorality is conduct which “is false to nature,
but it is false to nature only, because it is false to that
virtue,” which is “a natural idea” in the minds of men.‘“
This objection can be made of any principle which tries to
explain morality, but to denominate virtue “native,” “intui-
tive,” “immediate” is certainly not to explain it. Wollaston
dealt with this type of ethical theory in this way; the dif-
ference between good and evil cannot be deduced from the
common sense of mankind: “For it is much to be suspected

1" Garve, Ubersicht der vomehmstcn Prin. der Sittenl., p. 175.

1“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.
1“ Brown, Phil. of Mind, p. 264.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 14:5

there are no such innate maxims as they pretend, but that
the impressions of education are mistaken for them: and
besides that, the sentiments of mankind are not so uniform
and constant, as that we may safely trust an important dis-
tinction upon them.” 1"“

Blakey takes Brown to task for his superﬁcial criticism
of Wollaston. ' How can anyone, Brown had said, believe
that parricide is a crime, only because it is absurd, “only
for the same reason which would make it a crime for any
one to walk across a room on his hands and feet, because
he would then be guilty of the practical untruth of using
his hands, not as if they were hands, but as if they were
feet, as, in parricide, he would be guilty of the practical un-
truth of treating parents as robbers.” 1“ This, Blakey
says, is a strange misconception of the reasoning of Wollas—
ton. To treat parricide as no worse crime than walking
across the ﬂoor on hands and feet, “is not to treat those
two actions according to the nature of things, or as being
what they really are, but the contrary.” He mentions the
fact that Wollaston anticipates this very objection in his
case of a man talking to a post, which act he characterizes
as absurd ‘but not immoral.”7

In his defence of Wollaston against the misinterpretation
of Brown, Blakey seems to understand the position of Wol-
laston, but later in his treatment he says that this philoso-
phy, really, goes back to an ultimate Intuitionism. He
thinks that man has a special faculty for discerning moral
relations, that the ordinary reason is impotent as to the
decision of moral questions. If this is really Wollaston’s
position, of course, Blakey is right in saying that “this
amounts to the same as a moral sense, a moral intuition.”
I do not think, however, that his argument, which attempts
to prove Wollaston an Intuitionist, is at all convincing. He
says that Wollaston takes the position that when a man
performs a given moral action, that action bears a certain
relation to the constitution of things that all men are capable

"' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 24.

‘°‘ Blakey, His. of Moral Science, pp. 195-6.
“' Brown, Phil. of Mind, p. 264. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delia, p. 15.

 

146 The Ethics of William Wollaston

of discerning this relation. How is this to be done? How
are men to perceive those relations between moral actions
and the natures of things? Wollaston has not shown, he
says, “that this power diﬁ'ers in any respect from moral
sense.” Wollaston’s idea, according to Blakey, is that men
“approve of moral actions by the power of perceiving a
relation between those actions and other things,” which is
certainly a fair characterization.168 These two interpreta-
tions cannot be reconciled and the fact is that the last one
must be accepted for there is not the slightest evidence for
the position that Wollaston believed in a moral sense. For
Wollaston reason is the only guide and he did not believe
in any special moral reason, but, rather he thinks that moral
relations are discerned by the same reason as logical and
mathematical relations.169 Wollaston deﬁnitely denies that
he believes in innate ideas of morality or in a moral sense.
He says “They, who . . . deduce the difference between
good and evil from . . . certain principles that are born
with us, put the matter upon a very inﬁrm foot, for it is
much to be suspected there are no such innate maxims.” 17°

Price says that which determines whether an action is
right or wrong is “the truth of the case,” by which he means
“the circumstances and relations of the agent and the ob-
jects.” In certain relations “there is a certain right thing
to do. A certain manner of behavior we approve as soon
as the circumstances and relations are known. What is
good or bad, it is certain, must vary according to the dif-
ferent natures and circumstances of beings.” "1 Price
thinks that if the relations were otherwise a different kind
of behavior would be demanded by the situation, and this
different kind of behavior would, then, be right. After prac-
tically stating Wollaston’s view as his own, Price proceeds
to say that such expressions as “acting suitably to the
natures of things, treating things as they are, conformity to
truth, congruity and incongruity between actions and rela-

1“ Blakey, His. of Moral Science, pp. 201-2.
1" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 23.

1" Ibid., p. 24.

1" Price, Questions in Morals, p. 905.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 1497

tions, have little meaning if they are intended to deﬁne
virtue.” These expressions, he says, “evidently presuppose
an idea of virtue.” Saying that virtue consists in con-
formity to the relations of persons and things does not deﬁne
virtue, Price says, “and we will still have to, tell why it is
right to conform ourselves to these relations.” To answer
this, he thinks, that we can only fall back on “something
ultimately approved for which no justifying reason can be
assigned.” Saying that virtue is the conformity of our
actions to reason is just saying “that our actions are such
as our reason discerns to be right.” Price says so far from
conformity to nature being a guide to us in critical situa-
tions of life, as a matter of fact, when we cannot determine
what is right we are equally unable to tell what is conform-
able to the nature of things.172 He is saying that we must
have a more ultimate criterion than that of truth because
we cannot always discover the true nature of things or
decide just what conduct is conformable thereto.

Price is wrong in saying that a more ultimate deﬁnition
of virtue is implied by this one for no more ultimate con-
ception can be conceived than that of conformity to the
real nature of things. This conformity of life to reality
must be the ground of morality and so must be the criterion
of every view of Ethics. For,-as Wollaston says, “if the
formal ratio of moral good and evil be made to consist in a
conformity of men’s acts to the truth of the case . . . the
distinction seems to be settled in a manner undeniable, in-
telligible, practicable. For as what is meant by a true prop-
o'sition and matter of fact is perfectly understood by every-
body.” "3 But Price thinks that there is a more ultimate
conception and that it is a matter of immediate perception.
He says that morality is not a matter of any deductions of
reasoning; but, he says, morality is determined by the
natures and relations of things. “Treating an object as
being what it is, is treating it as it is right such an object
should be treated.” Conforming ourselves to truth is the
same as doing what is right to be done in the situation in

m Price, Questions in Morals, pp. 206-7.
"' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 25.

 

148 The Ethics of William Wollaston

which we ﬁnd ourselves, and Price seems to think that we
have immediate knowledge as to what we ought to do. He
thinks that the notion of right and wrong is presupposed in
acting according to truth. He says that Wollaston is wrong
in making his notion of good and evil to consist in the
“signifying and denying of truth,” because it is an attempt
to reduce “all virtue and vice to these particular instances
of them.” This, he says, leaves the nature of them unde-
ﬁned, “nor does he tell us how we come to the idea that
virtue is observing truth and vice the violation of it.” Price
says that Wollaston merely takes these as self—evident truths.
Price agrees that they are such but, he says, “not more so,
than our ideas of the other principles of morality.” Cruelty,
for example, is for Price a vice sui genesis and it cannot be
made to consist of the denying of truth, because when one
acts cruelly he may have “no intention to deny anything
true.” One may, Price says, be said, ﬁguratively speaking,
to contradict truth when he acts in a cruel manner.” One
could not, however, use such language did he not “perceive
antecedently to this application, that such a manner of act-
ing, in such circumstances, is wrong.” 17‘ Price grants that
Wollaston used the relation in a ﬁgurative way, so the real
difference between them is not this, but as to the real nature
of the moral judgment. Price makes it “a simple percep-
tion, . . . something ultimately approved for which no
justifying reason can be given.” 175 When virtue is said to
consist in the conformity to the relations of persons and
things, one cannot be said to have really deﬁned virtue in
the sense of giving a guide to life, for saying that virtue is
conformity of our actions to reason is just saying that
virtuous actions are such as our reason discerns to be
right."m Wollaston does not agree with this, for he says
the conformity of our actions to reason is precisely what
we mean by acting virtuously, and he would also say that
we must use our reason to ﬁnd out just what is the rational
thing to do.1"

"‘ Price, Questions in Morals, pp. 207-8.

‘" Ibid., p. 906.

”' Ibid., p. 909.

‘" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., Sec. 1, Paragraphs VI and IX.

 

Wollaston and His Critic: 149

John Gay says that most moralists agree as “to what
are virtuous and vicious actions,” that is as “to what par-
ticular actions are virtuous and what otherwise,” but he
says they differ “very much . . . concerning the criterion
of virtue.” He says that some “have placed it in acting
agreeably to nature, or reason; . . . others in conformity
with truth; others in promoting the common good; others
in the will of God, etc.” Now, he thinks, that this agree-
ment as to what particular actions are right and wrong,
along with this great disagreement concerning the criterion
of morality, makes one suspect, “either that they had a
different criterion” or “that all of them have the same
criterion in reality.” He takes the latter view saying that
they all have the same ultimate standard and that this is
that of acting agreeably to the will of God. Because God
is inﬁnitely good “he could have no other design in creating
mankind than their happiness,” consequently my own duty
consists in “promoting the happiness of mankind. How
shall I know what is for the happiness of mankind? He
says that “this is to be known only from the relations of
things.” 178

Gay takes Wollaston’s criterion of virtue and makes it
his criterion of happiness. He asks how one is to discover
what does conform to the nature and relations of things,
and he answers “either from experience or reason.” So he
agrees with Wollaston as to the method of ascertaining
truth and the nature of the actions that are conformable
thereto. “Thus the criterion” of conformability to the
nature of things “may in general be said to be reason; which
reason, when exactly conformable to the things existing,
i. e., when it judges of things as they are, is called right
reason.” "9 He gets very near to Wollaston’s position
when he says that we speak “of the reason of things,” mean-
ing “that relation which we should ﬁnd by our reason, if
our reason was right.” He says that “reason,” “truth,”
“conformity to relations,” “ﬁtness and unﬁtness of things,”

“' Gay, Concerning the Fundamental Prins. of Virtue, Brit. Moralists,

pp. 270-2.
"’ Ibid., p. 273.

 

150 The Ethics of William Wollaston

“the happiness of mankind”; “may in some sense be said to
be criteria of virtue; but it must always be remembered that
they are only remote criteria of it; being gradually subor-
dinate to its immediate and proper criterion, the will of
God.” 18° Wollaston would answer that virtue is acting
conformany with the will of God but that this is revealed
to us in the very nature of things. In discussing the idea
of Plato that virtue is “likeness to God” Wollaston says
that such likeness can be attained only by “the practice of
truth, God being truth, and doing nothing contrary to
it.” “31 Again, he says, the great law of natural religion,
“the law of nature or the Author of nature, is, that every
intelligent, active, and free being should so behave himself,
as by no act to contradict truth; or, that he should treat
everything as being what it is.” “32 Instead of admitting
that Gay is right in his position that every ethical standard
can be reduced ﬁnally to that of conformity to the will of
God, I would say, rather, that Gay is compelled to use the
criterion of conformity to truth in order to give any mean-
ing to his criterion. This means that conformity to nature
is his real criterion for, like Wollaston, when he asks “Lord
what would Thou have me do i’” he can get no other answer
than that of Wollaston’s principle of conformity to the
nature of things. He admits that God’s will is revealed in
the nature of things. Man’s duty, he says, is to promote
“the happiness of mankind,” and what this is can “be known
only from the relations of things.” 18"

V. CRITICISM
THAT WOLLASTON’s SYSTEM Is ovnn INTELLECTUALISTIC

This criticism is that Wollaston’s system is exclusively
intellectualistic and that it neglects the proper considera-
tion of feeling as the real dynamic of moral action. I do
not believe that this criticism can, with justice, be made

1"’Gay, Fundamental Prins. of Virtue, Sec. V, p. 274.

1"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 24;

1” Ibid., Sec. I, Paragraphs X and XI.
“’Gay, Fundamental Prins. of Virtue, Sections I and II.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 151

against his system of Ethics. It is true that his criterion
is based upon reason, rather than upon feeling, but he also
insists that everything is to be considered. It is reasonable
to consider happiness and other feelings, so these must go
into the motivation of the man who is trying to do the moral
thing and not alone the rationality of things. An objective
standard of morals is one that is based on the nature of
things, which is learned through experience. Moral rela-
tions are dependent upon real relations and the moral law
is that everything is to be treated as what it is. Feelings
are included in this catalogue.

In his defence of the thesis “Moral distinctions are not
derived from reason,” Hume takes occasion to criticize
Wollaston severely as the most outstanding defender of
the opposite thesis. He says that “there are in men’s minds
two kinds of things, namely, impressions and ideas.” This
distinction, he says, gives rise to the ethical question as to
whether our distinctions of right and wrong, are based on
the senses or on reason. Hume takes the position that
philosophers, like Wollaston, afﬁrm that virtue is but the
conformity of actions to reason and that morality, like
truth, is “discerned merely by ideas.” Now, says Hume,
“in order to judge of these systems, we need only consider
whether it be possible, from reason alone, to distinguish
between moral good and evil, or whether there must concur
with some other principles to enable us to make that distinc-
tion.” He thinks that reason can indicate the means of at-
taining a desired end, but it cannot itself determine that
end. Reason, he further objects, is powerless to move the
person to moral action, and “can never be the source of
so active a principle as a conscience or a sense of morals.”
He, therefore, concludes that the principles of morality
cannot be “conclusions of the reasons.” 18“

Reason, Hume argues, has to do only with truth and
truth consists of agreement or disagreement of ideas to
ideas and to real existence. Now, actions and volitions can
have no such relations “ ’Tis impossible, therefore, they
can be pronounced either true or false, and be either con-

“Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, pp. 413—18 and 456-7.

 

152 The Ethics ,of William Wollaston.

trary or conformable to reason.” 18‘ Literally speaking, he
is right, and Wollaston agrees with him on that point. As
has been shown, at length, Wollaston does not identify
morality and truth, but just takes the position that morality
is conformity of life to the real nature of things and is as
true as is the conformity of thought to the real nature of
things.186 Hume goes on to say that: “Actions do not
derive their merit, nor their blame from a contrariety to
it. Moral distinctions are not the offspring of reason.” 18"
He says that reason alone is not sufﬁcient to offer either
moral blame or approbation. The reason can only judge
between a question of fact or of relations and there is a
great difference between a question of fact and one of right.
He takes as an example, a case of ingratitude, and asks
how it can be shown by reason alone that ingratitude is im-
moral and “wherein the crime consists?” 188 Wollaston
might very easily ask Hume how he is to show “wherein the
crime consists” by any faculty other than that of reason,
for Hume grants that only the reason is capable of judging
facts and relations.

He tries, further, to show the impotency of reason as a
moral guide, by saying that “there is the same contrariety
in returning good for evil as in returning evil for good, and
yet the moral aspect is entirely different.” This means, he
thinks, that moral distinctions cannot rest on the reason,
but they must depend “on some internal sense or feeling
which nature has made universal in the whole species.18°
Wollaston has an entire division devoted to answering this
very objection. He says that it is absolutely necessary to
consider a thing in all its relations before we can pass a
correct moral judgment. He takes the case of riding a
stolen horse. A man who rides a stolen horse both conforms
to reality and violates the nature of things. So, Wollaston
says, that a consideration of all, relations would show that
returning good for evil conforms to the larger relations and

1" Ibid., p. 457.
1“Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 8.
1" Ibid., p. 458.
1"Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, p. 458.
1" Hume, Inquiry Concerning the Prins. of Morals, App., Sec. 1.
(

 

 

Wollaston and His Critic: 153

so is conformable to the bigger truth and the more impor-
tant natures and relations.”0 There is, this principle would
admit, some contrariety in returning good for evil, but in
the returning of evil for good one acts contrary to the larger
truth, one acts in violation of the more essential life rela-
tions.

Wollaston anticipates this criticism of Hume in his case
of a man treating an enemy as an enemy. He says “If
everything must be treated as being what it is, what rare
work will follow? For to treat my enemy as such is to
kill him, or revenge myself soundly upon him. . . . To this
it is easy to reply from what has been already said. For if
. . . the enemy . . . was nothing more than an enemy,
there might be some force to the objection; but since he
may be considered as something else besides that, he must
be used according to what he is in other respects, as well
as in that from which he is denominated my enemy. For
my enemy in the ﬁrst place is a man; and as such may claim
the beneﬁt of common humanity.” Not only is he a man
and so demanding to be treated as such but he is also a
citizen and so as such should not be punished without due
process of law. If truth, therefore, be observed, the result
will be this “I must treat” my enemy “as something com-
pounded of a man, a fellow-citizen, and an enemy, all three;
that is I must only prosecute him in such a way, as is agree-
able to the statutes and methods, which society” has estab-
lished.191

Blakey says that Wollaston’s principle, that when a man
acts virtuously his actions are in conformity with the
nature of things, is capable of being understood in two
ways. It may, he says, merely state that, as a matter of
fact, the virtuous actions of mankind are in conformity
with the nature of things. It may mean, on the other hand,
that the ideal of moral obligations is derived from the per-
ception of this conformity between moral actions and the
nature of things. Blakey says that it is not at all clear
whether Wollaston means to say that the conception of this

1" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.
“1 Ibid., p. 24.

 

154 The Ethics of William Wollaston

conformity is the reason why men act virtuously, or merely
the source of their notions of moral relations. He says that
it is inconceivable, though, that the mere perception of con-
formity between actions and things could possess the power
to prompt one to moral action. In a word, he criticizes
Wollaston’s system on the grund that it is merely intellectual
and consequently has no dynamic. “If I ﬂy to the succor of
my child in distress, can my sympathy be said to be moved,
or my sense of duty awakened, by viewing an agreement
between the hitherto unperformed act of rendering assist-
ance and the nature of things? Certainly not.” "2

Blakey, very properly, says that the principal part of
Wollaston’s moral theory rests upon the third proposition
of the ﬁrst section, “A true proposition may be denied, or
things may be denied to be what they are, by deeds as well
as by express words,” but I am not at all sure that he gets
Wollaston’s point, that things may be afﬁrmed or contra-
dicted by practice. Blakey takes the same view as to the
impotence of the intellect as does Hume “It shows the dif-
ferent paths and the direction to take, but it does not choose
one path rather than another.” 1’3 Wollaston says that
man possesses intelligence and freedom of will. It may be
asked if Ethics has not accomplished its task when it has
shown us what our duty is, and assured us that we are free
to do our duty? 19‘ That Wollaston is somewhat deﬁcient
as to the psychology of feeling and volition I would gladly
admit, but I cannot see that that constitutes a criticism
of his ethical criterion. The psychology of action is one
thing, the ethics of action is quite another. The ﬁrst is a
descriptive, a matter of fact, study; the second is a study
of norms, a study of criteria of conduct. Wollaston was
a moralist, primarily, and was interested mainly in the
normative study.195

The faculty of reason is impotent, says Hutcheson, “not
being able either to justify or to condemn. Those who

1” Blakey, His. of Moral Science, p. 192.
1“Ibid., p. 193.

1“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.
”° Ibid., Sections III and IV.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 155

identify moral goodness and conformity to truth uncon-
sciously employ the moral sense criterion.” Hutcheson
says that it is necessary to suppose that there “is a natural
and immediate criteria of morality, a sense or instinct, for
it is inconceivable that God should have made us so that we
would be left at the mercy of the slow and uncertain proc-
esses of reason.” 1“ By the use of his reason Hutcheson
tries to prove that the reason is incompetent to decide moral
matters and impotent to move one to act morally. He
admits, however, that we must depend upon the reason to
supply all the meaning and content, and to suggest all the
means towards the attainment of the moral end.”7 The
question might well be asked just what function the moral
sense or instinct performs in the moral life? It is granted
that it is a blind guide in the sense that it must depend
upon the ordinary knowing processes for all its knowledge
and upon the reason for suggestions as to just what should
be done in any given life situation. If the intellect is to
tell us what we ought to do, if that is admitted to be a
matter of judgment, what is the use of a power that can
only tell us to do our duty when we ﬁnd out what it is?
Why not make the other a matter of reason also? Is the
moral sense a blind giant carrying on his back a lame in-
tellect who can see? One certainly gets that impression
of the moral faculty from the writings of the intuitionists.
Wollaston thinks that no endowment is necessary to make
one a moral being. The possession of reason, of intelligence,
alone, is sufﬁcient explanation. An intelligent being will
inevitably perceive the natures and relations of things and
his own connection therewith. He will naturally and neces-
sarily perceive that his actions should conform to the
natures and relations.198

Leslie Stephen says that, in a sense, the universe is rea-
sonable throughout. The fall of a stone is as reasonable
as the working of a logician’s brain. From this point of
view, every conceivable event is reasonable, therefore no kind

1" Hutcheson, System of Moral Philosophy, pp. 56-8 and 272.

”' Inquiry into the Origin of Ideas of Beauty and Virtue, p. 195.
“Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., Sec. 1, Par. III, and Sec. III.

 

156 The Ethics of William Wollaston

of conduct can be considered more reasonable than any
other. In another sense only the conduct of a being capable
of knowing what he is doing is reasonable. “We may say
that a man is reasonable in so far as reason controls his
passions. And again we call a man reasonable, in propor—
tion as he apprehends certain general principles, and as
they affect his conduct.” 1” Stephen says “Reasoning and
feeling are bound together in an inseparable unity. Every
choice is a struggle between passions involving more or less
reasoning, but not resolvable into an emotionless process.
Every moral struggle has, not feeling on one side and reason
on the other, as is often supposed, but feeling and reason
on both sides, or there could be no struggle.” He says
that the mere intellectual perception could have no effect
on a man tempted to drink “if the sense of duty and love
of family did not represent a strong fund of emotion
capable of being called into vigorous operation.” 20° Wol-
laston would not be disposed to deny this. This would all
be involved in a full and complete consideration of the
natures of things. A man is, what? Why, in this case, the
husband of a loving wife, etc. Even though we grant the
impotence of the “mere intellectual perception” of what
one ought to do, what is established thereby with reference
to truth or conformity to the nature of things as the
criterion of virtue? Nothing, because a criterion has per-
formed its function when it has prescribed the appropriate
conduct in any given life situation.

Leslie Stephen says that reason can make anything seem
consistent to our prejudiced minds. Perhaps so, but are
we not even more likely to be prejudiced through feeling
than through reason? “To give a merely formal consistency
to my conduct, it is sufﬁcient that this cause should become
a reason; that the motives by which I am actually deter-
mined should be represented in the general rules which I
frame. If hatred to the red-haired actually inﬂuences me,
I have only to dislike the red-haired man in theory to make

1" L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., p. 56.
”° L. Stephen, Science of Ethics, pp. 58-66.

 

 

Wollaston and His Critics 157

my conduct consistent.” 2‘“ Wollaston would answer this
by saying that a certain limited consistency would char-
acterize such conduct, but that moral conduct means actions
that are in entire conformity to the nature of things. He
insists, in this connection, upon the necessity of considering
things in all relations. He says that “any thing . . . must
be considered not only . . . in one respect, but . . . the
whole description of the thing ought to be taken in.” 202
Again he says “all truths are consistent, nor can anything
be true any further than it is compatible with other things
that are true.” 203 It is not consistent with all life and
world relations for me to hate the red-haired and such con-
duct is therefore wrong. Wollaston considers this objection
to the criterion of truth in the case of the proper treatment
of an enemy. I do conform to a small segment of truth,
says Wollastpn, when I mistreat my enemy but I violate a
world of truth by so doing. So to hate the red-haired I make
my conduct consistent with a small segment of life’s circle
but it is inconsistent and immoral behavior, because
it neglects to consider the red-haired man in all rela-
tions.204

Leslie Stephen takes a position like that of Wollaston’s
contemporary critic, John Clarke, which position is an abso-
lute denial of the entire objective point of view in Ethics.
They hold that the motive alone determines the morality of
an act. John Clarke said that “in order to a person’s
afﬁrming or denying the truth, an intention to afﬁrm or deny
is required, without which he cannot be said to afﬁrm or
deny it. . . . It matters not, what notions or propositions
his words or actions may naturally excite in the minds of
those that hear the one, or see the other; if he himself had
no such propositions in his own mind, had no intentions
of communicating any such propositions to others, he can-
not in any propriety of language be said to afﬁrm or deny

‘1 L. Stephen, Science of Ethics, p. 66.
"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 19 and 24.
"Ibid., p. 25.

’°‘ Ibid., p. 24.

 

158 The Ethics of William Wollaston

them.” 2°“ Leslie Stephen says that a man who gives to the
poor conforms externally to the rule dictated by charity,
but his act is not charitable unless his motives are those of
sympathy. This proves, he thinks, that motives and not
external conformity to the nature of things determine the
morality of an act.206 How would our author answer this
objection? He would say that both right motive and con-
formity to the situation are required to constitute an act
completely conformable to the natures of things. Just as
everything enters into the motivation of the act so every-
thing enters into the evaluation of the act. Wollaston does
not deny that motive is an important factor in the evalua-
tion. It is true that his standard is that of conformity to
the nature of things, that he insists that “if things are but
fairly permitted to speak for themselves . . . they will pro-
claim their own rectitude or obliquity”; but it is just as
true that he insists that “That act which may be denomi-
nated morally good or evil, must be the act of a being
capable of distinguishing, choosing, and acting for himself;
or more brieﬂy of an intelligent and free agent, because in
proper speaking no act at all can be ascribed to that, which
is not indued with these capacities.” 20" Why this insist-
ence upon intelligence if he does not regard motive as an
all-important factor in evaluation? Wollaston goes further
and says that for an act to be a moral act “it must be the
act of an agent” and that he must act “from an internal
principle.” 208

Irons oﬂ'ers the criticism that this system “attempts to
eliminate the feeling and the will from the sphere of action,
and moral obligation from morality.” He grants that rea-
son “is a light which guides our steps, but not the power
which makes us move.” It might be asked, if it is not the
exclusive business of a moral standard “to guide our steps,”
to enlighten; and if this is true can rationalism in Ethics
be said to have failed only because it is impotent to make

"J. Clarke, Exam. of the Notion of Good and Evil in the “Reli. of
Nat. Delin.,” p. 9.

’"L. Stephen, Science of Ethics, p. 311.

3‘" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 7.

“Ibid., p. 8.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 159

men do what they know they ought to do? But Irons next
proceeds to criticize the system of Wollaston on the ground
that it makes of reason not only the faculty which perceives
moral relations, but also the impulse by means of which they
are realized in action.209 Surely Irons would not deny that
when a man acts morally his will is guided and determined
by intelligence. Wollaston does not deny the place of feel-
ing and will in morality. The feeling accompanying the
thought when we make a mere existential judgment is dif-
ferent from that which accompanies thoughts of personal
duty and responsibility, nevertheless it is the natures and
relations of things which constitute the moral situation and
the moral obligation. Yet, he would say, with Clarke, “the
faculty which determines what things are, determines what
ought to be.” 21° But this does not mean the identiﬁcation
of the two processes, as Irons thinks. The position is not
that: “The same faculty which decides in regard to the law
of right supplies the dynamic force which is necessary for
the realization of the law.” 2“ Clarke and Wollaston do
not rule out feeling as the dynamic nor the ﬂat of the will.
But since morality must not be individual and subjective
and since the feelings are the idiosyncrasies of the indi-
vidual, the criterion of morality cannot be based on the feel-
ings. It is reason which constitutes the universal in man,
consequently morality must be grounded on the reason.212
Morality when so conceived is objective, because the reason
in the individual man is but the conformity of thought to
the real nature of things.213

Simmel takes the position that “the notion of good and
evil is a merely subjective category, possessing no objec-
tivity.” Rashdall undertakes to refute this position. He
asks, how can we tell that the notion of duty is not a mere
emotion as Simmel claims? He answers, in the same way
that I know that the judgment, six is greater than four, is
no mere feeling. We have, says Rashdall, the same reason

"° Irons, Rationalism in Mod. Ethics, Phil. Rv., vol. XII, p. 86.

"° Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 86.

m Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Ph. Rv., vol. XII, p. 141.
“’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 45-6.

"' Ibid., pp. 50-1.

 

160 The Ethics of William Wollaston

for believing in the objectivity validity of moral conscious-
ness, as we have for supposing that the proposition two
and two make four is objectively true. The notion of duty,
he thinks, is as inexpugnable a notion of the human mind
as the notions of quantity or cause and we have as much
reason to believe in the validity of our moral judgments, as
we have for conﬁdence in the validity of those other cate—
gories.” Rashdall believes that moral judgments are the
work of reason and that there are such things as self-evident
moral judgments. “The real ethical judgment,” he says,
“is the judgment of value which afﬁrms that such and such
things are good.” They must come from “the rational or
intellectual part of our nature,” for they “represent one
particular activity of the same self which gives us the funda-
mental intellectual truths.” His answer to Simmel is very
much the same answer that Wollaston makes to that type
of moral theory, and his idea of the moral judgment is very
much the same as that of Wollaston, namely, the discern-
ment of the really congruous act in any life situation.214
Irons says that all purposive action is to make things
different from what they are, consequently we could better
deﬁne morality by saying that it is “the effort to make
things other than they are.” The question for Ethics, then
is: what is the ideal which ought to be actualized in the
world? Irons says that reason cannot answer this question,
consequently rationalism as the method of Ethics must be
abandoned. It is not true that in the moral world things
of every kind are now treated according to their true nature,
as Irons thinks. He says that to treat everything as that
which it is cannot be denominated moral because it is nat-
ural to treat things in that way. He thinks that morality
belongs to the world that ought to be, not to the world that
is. The identiﬁcation of truth and goodness would result
in the annihilatibn of the ideal world, Irons thinks. This,
Wollaston would gladly admit, but he would say that an
intellectual system of morals need not identify the intel-
lectual and the moral. As I have tried to show Wollaston

“Simmel, Einleitung in die Moralwissenschaft, vol. II, p. 347. Rash-
dall, Is Conscience an Emotion? p. 86 ﬁ‘.

 

Wollaston and His Critics 161

certainly does not identify the two. Irons says that the
identiﬁcation of the intellectual and moral would annihilate
the ideal world, because reason deals with that which is and
that only, so the rules of conduct prescribed by the reason
must be limited in the same way. If we act according to
reason alone, we must act in accordance with things as they
are, and Wollaston, Irons says, did not hesitate to deﬁne
the whole duty of man as treating things as they are.215

Wollaston denies that the moral ideal of truth, or that
of acting conformany with the real natures of things, is
the annihilation of the ideal world. The whole duty of man
does consist in living a life every act of which is consistent
and in conformity to the nature of things, but Wollaston
insists that the ideal life is that kind of life. If everything
was treated as that which it is, the world that is would be
the world that ought to bo. If God, man, beast, bird were
so considered, then would this world be an ideal world. It
is certain that the ideal cannot be realized by disregarding
the actual, but only by living truly which can only mean
acting conformably to the natures and relations of things.
Clarke well expresses this conception of the ideal of life by
saying that virtue consists in considering things to be what
they are and that vice consists in “the endeavor to make
things to be what they are not and cannot be.” 216 I do
not understand this to be-a static view of life and the world.
Things may very well be different each moment and for each
person in all the world, but things are always as they are
and our duty as free rational beings is to be found by truly
conforming our lives to the natures of things. Wollaston
thus eXpresses it: “In view of the eternal and necessary
relations which exist between things, reason lays an obliga-
tion upon us; but what is this obligation? simply that our
actions be in conformity with these eternal and necessary
relations.” 2" Our entire duty is, then, “that we should
act in accordance with the nature of things.”

'1' Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Rv., Vol. 12, p. 142.

“Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 66.
‘17 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., Sec. 1, Paragraph X.

 

A CRITICAL EXPOSI'I‘ION OF WOLLASTON’S SEC-
TION ON HAPPINESS

I

EXPOSITION or SECTION 11 “or HAPPINESS”

“That which demands to be next considered, is happi-
ness; as being in itself most considerable; as abetting the
cause of truth; and as being indeed so nearly allied to it,
that they cannot well be parted. We cannot pay the
respect due to one, unless we regard the other. Happi-
ness must not be denied to be what it is; and it is by the
practice of truth that we aim at that happiness, which is
true.” Wollaston says that a being may be said to be
happy the sum total of whose pleasures exceeds the sum
total of his pain. “To make itself happy,” Wollaston says,
“is a duty, which every being, in proportion to its capacity,
owes to itself; and that, which every intelligent being may
be supposed to aim at in general.” 1 This, it must be ad-
mitted, when taken alone, reads like Hedonism. And we
can admit that Wollaston does rank happiness very high
among the hierarchy of the real and true things of life.
It is not true, however, as some have thought, that he con-
sidered happiness as the end and truth only as the means
to that end. It is not true to his teachings to deﬁne Wol-
laston’s system as the search of happiness by the practice
of truth.2 Wollaston does, in the metaphysical portion
of his treatise, profess his faith in the rationality of the
universe and so his belief in the ultimate coincidence of
truth and happiness; and, from that point of view, says
that Natural Religion may be regarded “as the pursuit of
happiness by the practice of reason and truth.” 3 This is

1 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 37.
' Anon., Art. Wollaston, in Britannica.
' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 52.

162

 

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimss 163

the basis of Hurst’s statement that his “creed was the pur-
suit of happiness by the practice of reason and truth.’H

It is somewhat surprising that one who takes the intel-
lectual attitude towards morals, as does Wollaston, should
give so much attention to happiness. I think that the ex-
planation is to be found partly in the historic situation,
and partly in the fact that an objective system of morality
must regard human happiness as of the highest importance.
Many of his predecessors and contemporary ethical writers
sought to ﬁnd in happiness the criterion of morality. Wol-
laston grants that the consideration is of the highest im-
portance, but he denies that it alone can be the criterion.
Happiness, like everything else, must be treated as what it
is. “We cannot,” says Wollaston, “act with respect to
either ourselves, or other men, as being what we are and
they are, unless both are considered as being susceptive of
happiness and unhappiness.” This, however, is not all that
must be considered, as Hedonism teaches, but happiness is
only one of the things that must be considered in treating
men as what they are. So far from happiness being the
‘ ultimate criterion for him, he says, that “the true and ulti-
mate happiness of no being can be produced by anything
that interferes with truth, and denies the natures of things;
so neither can the practice of truth make any being ulti-
mately unhappy.” 5 The ultimate criterion, then, is truth
and not happiness, for truth of every kind cannot be re-
duced to happiness, but happiness is signiﬁcant for morals
only in so far as it is reducible to truth. So far from
Wollaston going over to Hedonism, as some of his critics
accuse him of doing, he compels Hedonism to come to his
standard. There are, he says, higher and lower, true and
false pleasures.6

Wollaston takes the position that to treat people “as
being what they are” is to treat them “as beings both de-
sirous of happiness and as requiring happiness for their self-
realization. He goes so far as to say that: “To make it-

‘ Hurst, His. of Rationalism, p. 101.
' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 88.
' Ibid., p. 88.

 

164 The Ethics of Wﬂliam Wollaston

self happy is a duty which every being . . . owes to itself,
and which every intelligent being aims at.” While all men
desire happiness and seek to realize it, all do not ﬁnd it.
The reason for this failure is due to the fact that their lives
are not guided by the light of truth. Happiness, says Wol-
laston, is closely allied to truth, and it is “by the prac-
tice of truth” that men attain “that happiness, which is
true.” The false life cannot be a happy life, says Wollaston,
but only that life which is lived in conformity to its own
true self and to the real nature of things can be a happy
life. He is especially insistent upon the fact that: “The
happiness of every being must be something that is not in-
compatible with . . . its nature. . . . For instance, noth-
ing can be the true happiness of a rational being, that is in-
consistent with reason. . . . If anything becomes agreeable
to a rational being, which is not agreeable to reason, it is
plain his reason is lost, his nature deprest, and that he now
lifts himself among irrationals,” for “a rational being can
like nothing of that kind without a contradiction to itself.
For to do this would be to act, as if it were the contrary of
what it is,” and “whatever interferes with reason, interferes
with truth.” 7 According to Wollaston there are two things
that “are to be religiously regarded in all our conduct,” and
“these are met together and embrace each other.” These are
truth and happiness. Wollaston does not subordinate either
to the other, but he does deﬁne happiness in terms of truth,
which is the same as saying that truth is a more ultimate
category. He says that happiness is the natural and neces-
sary consequence of a life of truth, and consists of “such
pleasures, as company, or follow the practice of truth, or are
not inconsistent with it.” The criterion of morality is truth
and one can be happy only by living a life that is conform-
able to truth.8

Wollaston argues for the ultimate coincidence of happi-
ness and truth on the ground, that “that which contradicts
nature and truth opposes the will of the Author of nature.”
Because of the freedom he possesses as his birth-right, a

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 38—9.
'Ibid., p. 39.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimu 165

ﬁnite being may act in opposition to the Divine will, and, in
so doing, may “break through the constitution of things” or
violate the nature of reality. He denies, however, that hap-
piness can be attained in that way. In a consistent universe,
he says, in effect, those who live conformany with the true
nature of things must be ultimately happy; and those who
live contradictory lives must be, in the long run, unhappy.9
Things could be otherwise only in a crazy world. In a
consistent world the true way of life must lead to happiness,
so the way to truth and the way to happiness must be ulti-
mately the same. He postulates religion as the necessary
ground of the unity of truth and happiness. An intelligible
world must be a rational and consistent world, a world in
which good and evil, true and false are grounded upon the
real and ultimate nature of things. Happiness must, also,
somehow ﬁnd its true place in the scheme of things. The
rationality shown in this cosmic unity is natural religion.
“The way to happiness and the practice of truth incur the
one in the other.” He had, in an earlier passage, said that
“nothing can produce the ultimate happiness of any being,
which interferes with truth; and therefore whatever doth
produce that, must be something which is consistent and co-
incident with this.” 10 These two things, then, “are both to
be religiously regarded in all our conduct. And since both
these units unite so amicably, and are at last the same, here
in one religion which may be called natural upon two ac—
counts.” 11
Wollaston certainly did not think himself to be a Hedonist,
not even a universalistic one, of this fact I think we can
, make sure from his own writings. He says that the im-
mutable distinction between right and wrong is the same as
that between true and false, that is in conformity or non—
conformity to the real nature of things. They who say that
goodness consists in “following nature” are correct, he says,
if by “following nature,” not the acting according to one’s
desires as the Hedonists teach, but “the acting according to

'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 38, 40 and 15.

1° Ibid., pp. 40, 42 and 172-3.
11 Ibid., pp. 173-4..

 

“‘"W‘wnkkhtw ~L‘-\k\—.‘Jub_‘h.u_\_i A 4

 

166 The Ethics of Waliam Wollaston

the natures of things,” the “treating of everything as being
what they are in nature or according to truth.” Wollaston
says that “this does not appear to be their meaning. And
if it is only that a man must follow his own nature, since
his nature is not purely rational, but there is a part of him,
which he has in common with the brutes, they appoint him
a guide which I fear will mislead him, this commonly being
more likely to prevail, than the rational part.” 12 By fol-
lowing nature, he in effect says, we must mean, if this for—
mula is to serve as a criterion of virtue, not the following
of our physical desires and appetites, which nature we have
in common with the brutes, but the following of our higher
and rational nature, that nature which is the peculiar endow-
ment of man. This is certainly very far from a hedonistic
conception of life. Pleasure and happiness, like everything
else good and true, must get their due realization, but the
criterion is not in the senses nor in the feelings, but in the
reason. Wollaston, to be sure, grants that human nature
is not purely rational, a part of his nature being like that
of the brutes, but this animal side of man is not his essential
nature. The essential thing about man is his reason, and
whatever will stand the test of reason is right and that which
will not stand that test is wrong. “Right reason” mean-
ing that “which is found by the right use of our rational
faculties,” is “coincident with truth.” 13

Wollaston offers still another argument against Hedonism;
he says that those who undertake to deﬁne morality in terms
of pleasure and pain end in leaving it undeﬁned, because men
are even more different in their ideas and tastes as to what
constitutes happiness than as to what constitutes the good.
“As men have different tastes, different degrees of sense
and philosoPhy, the same thing cannot be pleasant to all;
and if particular actions are to be proved by this test,
the morality of them will be very uncertain; the same
act may be of one nature to one man, and of another to an-
other.” He goes further and says that “unless there be
some limitation added as a fence for virtue, men will sink

1' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 22.
1’ Ibid., p. 23.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 167

into gross voluptuousness, as in fact the generality of Epi-
curus’ herd have done (notwithstanding all his talk of tem—
perance, virtue, tranquillity of mind, etc.).” He then pro-
poses a “limitation as a fence for virtue. For not all pleas-
ures, but only such pleasures as are true, or happiness, may
be reckoned among the ﬁnes, or ultima bonorum.” 1‘ Bishop
Butler in commenting upon this passage, has this to say:
“A late author of great and deserved reputation says, that
to place virtue in following nature, is at least a loose way to
talk. And he has reason to say this, if what I think he in-
tends to express be true, that scarce any other sense can be
put upon these words, but acting as any of the several parts,
without distinction, of a man’s nature, happened most to
incline him.” 15

A rather strong case can be made against Wollaston on
the charge of Hedonism, and I have no disposition to evade
the charge. The charge takes about this form. Wollaston
does say that the criterion of morality is truth or conformity
to reality. But, when he is asked, what truth must be con-
formed to, to constitute virtue? he is compelled to answer,
truths concerning personality. And when he is pushed back
still further and asked, but how, in particular, can one con-
tradict the nature of personality or conform to the nature
of personality? he has, practically, said that we must be-
have in such a way as to promote human happiness. One
cannot be said to be living true, when he is promoting human
misery. The case mentioned by Wollaston of failing to go
to the assistance of a man grevously hurt is a case in point;
after saying that by so acting, one denies “human nature
to be what it is,” he then, to all appearance, explicates his
meaning in terms of Hedonism. He, who so treats a human
being, thereby denies “those desires and expectations, which
I am conscious to myself I should have under the like misfor-
tune, to be what they are.” 16 The same resort to Hedonism
is made when Wollaston wishes to explain degrees of crime.
It is true that he says that immorality consists in the viola-

“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 24.
" Butler, Preface to Sermons.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 19.

 

168 The Ethics of Wﬂliam Wollaston

tions of truth, but when he tries to explain these violations
of truth in concrete human terms, it appears that it is hu-
man happiness which is violated. The one who steals a book
deprives the proprietor of happiness. “It is true A is
guilty of a crime in not treating the book as being what it
is, the book of B, whose happiness partly depends upon it;
but still if A should deprive B of a good estate he would be
guilty of a much greater crime.” Why? Because of the
greater happiness accruing to B from the estate than from
the book.‘ Wollaston, though, takes the position that hap-
piness violated is just truth violated, and so makes his ulti-
mate criterion not happiness but truth.17

There is a notion held by some moralists that a purely
intellectual system of ethics will be absolutely abstract, and
consequently entirely unrelated to the actual world of lives
among which we live. This has certainly characterized the
intuitional intellectualism in morals. A proper evalua-
tion of happiness, it is said, relates morals more closely to
real life. I think that there is considerable truth in this
contention. Certainly a view of ethics that entirely disre-
garded such an important human consideration can be no
true guide to life. In fact those Who interpret Wollaston
intuitionally say that he would have one conform to the
absolute truth, regardless of all human consequences. They
mention especially his hesitancy to tell a lie, even to save a
life.18

Now, one can take a position that considers happiness of
the very highest importance without going over to Hedon-
ism. It is possible to treat happiness purely objectively,
and when so considered it is evaluated according to the
criterion of truth just as othér life values. I think that Car-
neri is correct in thinking that Wollaston truly harmonized
truth and happiness. He says that “the sensualistic prin-
ciple . . . lent . . . the weight of experience or at least
never permitted Wollaston to lose himself in metaphysical

1' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 91. _

‘3 Ibid. Bott, Refutation of “The Reli. of Nat. Balm,” p. 90. J.
Clarke, Examination of “The Reli. of Nat. Delia,” p. 61. Wollaston,
Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 27.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimss 169

ﬂights.” Carneri characterizes his ethics as “realistic” or
objective. It was rationalistic in the sense that the nature
of morality was “deduced not from a speciﬁc impulse of the
individual, but from the ﬁtness of things.” It was not, how-
ever, rationalistic in the sense that human feelings were dis-
regarded. There results from the life lived “conformany
with the nature of things . . . a general harmony for the
individual.” He says that Wollaston determined the good,
not abstractly but in view of “the results” that may natur-
ally be expected. So the good, he came to regard, as that
which can be expected to lead to the happiness and well be-
ing of the individual and of society. Carneri very truly says,
that this placing of “the mark of the good on an objective
basis (das Markmal des Guten in die Objectivitat)” neces-
sarily had the “fruitful result of reinterpretng truth.”
When speaking morally, anyway, truth must mean not just
“abstract coherency (Zusammenhang)” but real human de—
sires and life relations, that is die Wahrheit must also be
thought of objectively.19

Windelband says that in order for Wollaston to prove
that actions which have “diese logische Richtigkeit . . .
nothwendig auch zur Gliickseligkeit fiihren,” he must sub-
stitute for his abstract logical criterion, which is purely in-
tellectual, Clarke’s idea of “ﬁtness.” I do not feel this dif-
ference between the two systems. I think that Wollaston’s
system is as objective as is Clarke’s. Wollaston says that
morality is acting in conformity to the nature and relations
of things. It is simply being as true in action as in thought.
Clarke, it seems to me, just used somewhat different lan-
guage to express the same general meaning. He says that
the moral act is the ﬁtting act. In one place in Wollaston’s
work he used Clarke’s term.20 Windelband says that in
order to prove that the moral act which is in agreement with
truth, i. e., “has a correct logical content,” also leads to
happiness one must show “how the treatment of relations,
which rest on a correct knowledge of the same, brings about

1’Carneri, Grundlegung der Ethik, p. 407.

’° Windelband, Gesch. der Neuen Phil., vol. I, p. 266. Wollaston, Reli.
of Nat. Delin., p. 43. Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 45.

 

170 The Ethics of William Wollaston.

for the agent a favorable form of the same.” This does not
seem to me to be true. Why can we not believe, with Wollas-
ton, that happiness really ought to be the result of a life of
truth and that it would really be the most contradictory
thing conceivable for it to result otherwise? Just as it would
be inconceivable for morality to be contradictory to truth
and reality, so also is it inconceivable for goodness and truth
not to lead to happiness.21

Gass interprets Wollaston as meaning that a life of truth '
leads necessarily to happiness. The life of conformity to
the true nature of things ought to result in happiness, for it
would not be according to the nature of things for it to re-
sult otherwise. It would be unﬁtting for a good life to
result in unhappiness. Gass says that the “appropriateness
recommends itself through itself (das Wohlbemessene emp-
ﬁehlt sich durch sich selbst). It makes the impression of the
ﬁtting, . . . and through its rule it guarantees also happi-
ness (verbiirgt durch seine Herrschaft auch die Gliickselig-
keit).” I understand Grass to say that Wollaston teaches
that the life of truth is to be lived, not primarily, because
it leads to happiness but because it is appropriate and ﬁt-
ting. He very truly says, however, that Wollaston does
teach that the true life will be happy. He goes so far as to
say, as we will see later, that the next life must make right
the contradictions of this.22

N oack also interprets Wollaston’s system as an effort to
reconcile the inclinations and the reason. Happiness is not
to be thought of as an additional principle, thinks Noack,
but instead he understands Wollaston to teach that “with
the moral purpose of the truth that of happiness coincides”
for happiness is nothing but “the sum of true pleasures.”
In other words, he says, that Wollaston insists that happi-
ness is to be treated just as we treat other things and that
it is to be similarly evaluated according to its true place and
purpose in life. “A being is to be pronounced happy to the

’1 Windelband, Gesch. der Neuen Phil., vol. I, p. 267. Wollaston, Reli.

of Nat. Delin., pp. 38-9 and 43.
” Gass, Gesch. der Christlichen Ethik, p. 19. Wollaston, Reli. of N at.

Delin., pp. 72 and 113-14. ‘

 

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimess 171

extent that its pleasures are true. . . . A rational being
cannot ﬁnd happiness in irrational pleasures without con-
tradiction; therefore only that makes man happy which is
in accord with reason. Therefore the way to happiness and
the realization of truth blend, and it is therefore the duty
of every being to strive honestly after the realization of rea—
son (aiifrichﬁg' nach der ausiibung der Vernunft zu stre-
ben).” This should be done for there is no other way to
realize either goodness, truth or happiness, except through
a life lived conformany to reason, both in theoretical and in
practical matters.28

II

AN EXAMINATION OF THE HEDONISTIC INTERPRETATION OF
WOLLASTON

‘ I think that there is far more ground for the criticism
that Wollaston’s system is, in the last analysis, hedonistic
than for any of the other objections that have been offered
to his ethical philosophy. He certainly reacted very strongly
against the asceticism and rigorism that have generally char-
acterized rationalistic ethics, but the question is, did he
go over to the other extreme,—that of Hedonism? Many
think that he did.

The writer of the unsigned article in the Britannica on
Wollaston goes so far as to say that he subordinated truth
to happiness. “Wollaston starts with the assumption that
religion and morality are identical and labors to show that
religion is the pursuit of happiness by the practice of truth
and reason.24 He then proceeds to say, continues the ar-
ticle, that moral evil is the practical denial of a true propo-
sition, and moral good the afﬁrmation of it. The article
makes it very clear that Wollaston discusses the nature of
good and evil, primarily, because to be happy a man must

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 38-9. Noack, Geschichtliches
Lexikon der Philosophie, p. 931.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 43-4 and 52. Anon., Art. Wol-
laston, in Britan.

 

172 The Ethics of William Wollaston

pursue the one and avoid the other. Truth and goodness
must be practiced because these are the necessary precondi-
tions of happiness, which is for Wollaston the goal of life.
Granting this to be a true interpretation, it is not, truly
speaking, a hedonistic interpretation of morality for the
criterion, even though it be but instrumental, is not feeling
but truth. Happiness is, to be sure, thought to be the end
of life but it is given an objective signiﬁcation. The goal of
life is happiness but to attain happiness one must be good.
The way to be good is to conform one’s life to the truth,
which means living conformany with the real nature and
relations of things, or “treating everything as that which it
is.” 25 I think that it can be shown from Wollaston’s own
writing that he makes truth the real end of life rather than
happiness, and that he considers happiness one of the
things which should be sought, both for ourselves and for
others, because it is one of the true goods of life.26 “There
are,” he says, “some ends which the nature of things and
truth require us to aim at, and at which therefore if we do
not aim, nature and truth are denied. If a man does not
desire to prevent evils, and to be happy, he denies both his
own nature and the nature of happiness to be what they are.
And then further, willingly to neglect the means, leading to
such an end, is the same as not to propose the end, and must
fall under the same censure.” 27 I understand Wollaston
to be saying in this passage, and this passage is truly repre-
sentative of his position, that it is our duty to be happy
and that it is wrong not to seek our own happiness, but I do
not understand him to say that this is the only goal of life,
and that happiness should be sought at the expense and to
the exclusion of other true things of life.

Hurst says that Wollaston’s “creed was the pursuit of
happiness by the practice of reason and truth,” but he does
not stop here but goes on and gives this an extreme interpre-
tation, namely, that “he was the Epicurean of the system
which he adopted.” This, as we have seen, is an entirely

1"‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 8, 13, 38-9, and 43-4.

"Ibid., pp. 40-2. . .
’7 Ibld., p. 18. Anon., Art. Wollaston, 1n Britan.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 173

wrong interpretation of that passage, because Wollaston
is here discussing the ultimate coincidence of truth and hap-
piness. In this sense, namely, from the point of view of
eternity he can deﬁne Natural Religion “as the pursuit of
happiness by the practice of reason and truth.” 28 Bent-
ham interprets the ethics of Wollaston in the same way as
does Hurst. He reduces the extreme intellectualism of Wol-
laston to nothing but the necessary means to the getting of
happiness. “We have,” says Bentham, “one philosopher,
who says that there is no harm in anything in the world but
in telling a lie; and that if, for example, you were to murder
your own father, this would only be a particular way of
saying, he was not your father. Of course, when this phil—
osopher sees anything that he does not like, he says, it is a
particular way of telling a lie. It is saying, that the act
ought to be done, when, in truth, it ought not to be done.”
Bentham thinks that all systems of ethics appeal, in the
last analysis, to the principle of happiness, so, quite natur-
ally, he makes of Wollaston’s intellectualism the mere rules
for the attainment of happiness, the one thing desirable in
life. Things other than happiness may be sought but only as
means to the attainment of happiness. Wollaston was an
exceedingly wise calculator, but, nevertheless, he was a hed—_
onist, a seeker of happiness and that only. In commenting on
Wollaston’s notion of morality as conformity to nature, he
says: “To say that an act is unnatural or repugnant to
nature means, ultimately, that I do not like it. It is, there-
fore, repugnant to what ought to be the nature of everybody
else.” 29 Very similar to that of Hurst and Bentham is the
interpretation of La Rossignol. He says that for Wollas-
ton: “Happiness is the ethical end, and virtue the means
to it.” This estimation of Wollaston gives the impression
that he considered virtue only instrumental, that he would
advocate virtue only when it seemed the necessary means to
happiness; or, at least, that he does not teach that men
ought to live virtuously for any other reason than that a

" Hurst, His. of Rationalism, p. 101. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin.,
p. 59.

" Bentham, Principles of Morals in British Moralists, p. 348.

 

174! The Ethics of William Wollaston

life of virtue is the necessary precondition of a life of hap-
piness.”

John Brown’s interpretation is very much the same as
those I have just considered. He tries to convict Wollaston
of Hedonism: “In every instance that Wollaston brings,
the happiness of man is the single end to which his rule of
truth verges in an unvaried manner.” Brown undertakes to
prove that Wollaston really made the diﬂ'erentia of virtue
and vice, not truth but pleasure, and as a proof of this he
considers Wollaston’s own case of talking to a post. “He
considered,” says Brown, “the talking to a post as an ab-
surdity,” but “he is far from condemning it as an immoral
action.” Why did Wollaston consider talking to a post
absurd but not immoral, he asks, if conformity to the nature
of things is his real criterion of morality “for certainly one
who talks to a post is far from conforming his actions to
the nature of things”? Brown says that in the very same
passage in which Wollaston discusses talking to a post he
gives an instance of the violation of moral truth. In giving
this instance he has, says Brown, recourse to man, “and
not only so but to the happiness of man” as the only possible
kind of case of the violation of moral truth. He says that
the only reason Wollaston gives for saying that it is morally
wrong to treat a man as a post and not wrong to treat a
post as a man is that a man is capable of happiness while
a post is not. Brown claims, further, that Wollaston judges
truth entirely by the standard of happiness, proving it to
be, in his estimation, a more ultimate moral principle than
that of truth. “And I would gladly know,” Wollaston asks,
“how one truth can be more important than another, unless
upon this principle, and in reference to the production of
happiness.” (This supposed quotation is not found in
Wollaston.) Brown goes on to say that “Wollaston, indeed,
conﬁrms his interpretation when he speaks as follows: The
truth violated in the former case was, B had a property in
that, which gave him such a degree of happiness; that vio-
lated in the later was a greater violation . . . in that it
gave him a happiness vastly superior to the other. The vio-

’° La Rossignol, Ethical Philosophy of Samuel Clarke, p. 88.

 

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 175

lation therefore in the later case, upon this account, is a
vastly greater violation than in the former.” 31 I under-
stand Wollaston’s position to be that happiness is a real
aspect of true personality and so persons can be violated in
that way, but equally so by the violation of anything per-
taining to persons. Wollaston says that when he speaks
of acts inconsistent with truth he means any truth whatso-
ever: “I would have everything taken to be what in fact and
truth it is.” Elsewhere, however, he says, that there are
degrees of good and evil dependent upon and determined by
the importance of the truth violated. But, asks his hedonis-
tic critics, what determines this importance? and they are
very sure that he is compelled to answer that human happi—
ness is the measure of the importance of truth. Wollastor
does say that it is worse to steal an estate than a book,
because the owner of the estate is deprived of more happi-
ness. In a sense he may be said also to anticipate Utib
tarianism, in this instance, for he says that not only the man.
himself but also his family, his descendents, will be deprived
of happiness if he is deprived of an estate, whereas the depri-
vation in case of the book is a triﬂing matter in comparison.
It seems to me, however, that Wollaston’s position in these
cases where happiness is speciﬁcally mentioned as suffering
violation is really that nature, reality, personality is vio-
lated.82 Albee says, in this connection, that “Wollaston
professed to vindicate the absolute character of virtue . . .
really introduced hedonistic considerations at the crucial
point.” 33 There is considerable ground for this estimation
of his philosophy. In reply, however, we can say that there
is just as much reason to say that, in the last analysis,
Hedonism “introduced” other “considerations at the crucial
point.” I refer particularly to the qualitative distinctions
between pleasures, implying a criterion other than that of
pleasure.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 23, 20 and 172-3. Brown, Es-
says on the Characteristics, pp. 172-3.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 21.

" Albee, His. of English Utilitarianism, p. 84.

 

1'76 The Ethics of William Wollaston

III

AN EXAMINATION 01" THE UTILITABIAN INTERPRETATION OF
WOLLASTON

The only objection that I have to classifying Wollaston
as a utilitarian is the historic identiﬁcation of Utilitarianism
with Universalistic Hedonism. It is true that John Stuart
Mill’s principle, “the greatest good of the greatest number,”
is a fair statement of Wollaston’s ethical ideal. In order,
however, for this to serve as his formula it must be given a
very decided objective interpretation and it must be abso-
lutely divorced from Psychological Hedonism. Mill, and
this has been true of the utilitarians generally, uses the
formula “the greatest good of the greatest number” inter-
changeany with the formula “the greatest happiness of the
greatest number.” Wollaston does not identify the two
meanings but would subsume happiness under the other as
a case of something which makes for human welfare. But
more important than this is the other difference, namely,
their very different attitudes towards happiness itself. Mill
makes a great advance over his predecessors in that he
universalized happiness, but it is also true that he never
disconnected his system from that of Psychological Hedon-
ism. In fact he still holds to Psychological Hedonism and
starts from it as a self-evident fact. He says that the only
reason why everyone should seek to realize “the greatest
happiness of the greatest number” is, because each one does,
as a matter of fact, desire his own happiness.34 Wollaston
makes a great deal of happiness but he thinks of it as an
objective good that should be sought for ourselves and for
all men. He thinks of happiness as being an effect of true
living, but he thinks that we should plan with reference to
happiness in so far as we can anticipate. He would agree
with Clarke that actions are only good or evil according
as they tend to the beneﬁt or disadvantage of all men.
Lines of conduct that result in human misery can be de-

“J. S. Mill, Utilitarianism, chap. IV. Bradley, Ethical Studies, p. 103.
Sidgwick’s Method of Ethics, Bk. III, chap. XIII, p. 3.

 

 

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 1'77

nominated bad, and those that make for human happiness
are good. But Wollaston says that this is only saying that
in treating things according to their natures, in acting con-
formany with the real nature of things, that above all else
human beings should be considered, and that this means
looking out for their happiness and their welfare.“5

In discussing moral laws and natural relations Selby-Bigge
has a line of argument by which he thinks he proves that
Wollaston’s intellectual principle of evaluating conduct re-
duces ﬁnally to Utilitarianism. It is possible to show “that
immoral action is absurd” in the sense that it defeats “its
own end,” in that it commits the “material absurdity” of
“seeking satisfaction in pursuits which cannot afford it.”
Wollaston uses “material absurdity as a test of vice,” says
Selby-Bigge. “It appears as the absurdity of treating
things as other than they are, the absurdity of treating
men as brutes and brutes as stones, of ignoring the natures
of things. . . . This line of argument . . . leads easily into
Utilitarianism, for to treat men as they are is to treat them
primarily as capable of happiness.” 3" Taking Wollaston’s
entire system into consideration this only means that man’s
real nature and happiness and the good of society must be
considered as things essentially real and so deserving of
realization. I cannot see that this is going over to Utili-
tarianism, for treating men as men, as creatures desiring
and capable of happiness is but conforming to an aspect of
their nature, or treating them as what they are. What Wol-
laston really does is to treat men not as creatures capable
of desiring happiness and as that v ﬂy, but he treats them as
that and treats happiness as one essential aspect of man’s
nature.37

Leslie Stephen says that “Wollaston slides into Utili-
tarianism.” From the bare formula that “what is, is,” and
as necessarily following from that that everything should
be treated accordingly; he passes to the statement “that

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 40-2. Clarke, Nat. Reli. in
British Moralists, 524.

" Selby-Bigge, British Moralists, pp. XXXI-II. Wollaston, Reli. of
Nat. Delin., pp. 24 and 38.

‘7 Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 37-9.

 

178 The Ethics of William Wollaston

happiness must not be denied to be what it is.” 38 He goes
still further towards Utilitarianism, thinks Leslie Stephen,
when he says “it is by the practice of truth that we arrive
at that happiness which is true.” 3" I do not think that he
makes good the accusation that Wollaston ﬁnally resorts to
Utilitarianism for his ultimate principle of morality. It
seems to me that what he really proves is that Wollaston ex-
tends the principle of truth to include happiness. His quo-
tations from Wollaston prove that he makes truth the cri-
terion of morality, and since true happiness is a desirable
human state that it should be sought as anything else that
is true and in conformity to the nature of things.40

In one passage Erdmann gives Wollaston an interpreta-
tion that would be denominated utilitarian. “He proceeds
to the consideration of mankind and after he has designated
happiness as the purpose of the society of mankind, also
as the purpose of the living together of people in general, he
deducts therefrom the law that nothing must happen which
disturbs the happiness of other people, but then it is ﬁnally
not only a privilege to further one’s own happiness, but a
duty, since the neglect of the same involves the proposition
that happiness is not happiness.” Erdmann is right in say-
ing that Wollaston ranks happiness very high, but I do
not think that we can say that he considered it the purpose
of human society.41

Historically, intellectualism in morals in England has
been largely of the intuitional type. For this reason Sidg-
wick says the other school triumphed. Because intuitional
methods were discredited the emotional view of. morals be-
came popular, with the result that duty lost its objectivity
and morality became a subjective matter. “Only after the
extreme position to which Hume ﬁnally carried this view,
was its dangerous character perceived and also the neces-
sity of bringing into prominence again the cognitive element
in moral consciousness.” Sidgwick thinks Wollaston signiﬁ-

"L. Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. II, p. 10.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 52.

‘° Ibid., pp. 39-40.

“Erdmann, Gesch. der Neuen PhiL, vol. II, p. 122.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 1'79

cant in that he duly considered the objective side of morals
and the intellect as the moral faculty. “Rightness and
wrongness,” he says, “must be made dependent upon certain
general characteristics of the action, agent and circum-
stances; and accordingly that the moral truth apprehended
must be essentially universal, though particular in our ap-
prehension of it.” 42 He says in another passage that
“Wollaston sought to exhibit the more fundamental of
the received rules as axioms of perfect self-evidence, neces-
sarily forced upon the mind in contemplating human be-
ings in their relations, but Wollaston also took the position
that the results of actions, in so far as they can be antici-
pated, are to be considered and constitute important facts in
the motivation.“3 It is~this consideration of results of ac-
tions that make his system objective. The most important
result that can be anticipated and that consequently enters
into the motivation is happiness. Considering happiness as
one of the results of actions to be taken into consideration,
is very different from psychological Hedonism, which takes
the position that the action is determined by feeling. Wol-
laston’s position, then, is really rationalistic and objective
for he considers everything.“ .

Wollaston’s attempt to consider all sides of life and to
make ethics ob ective, by insisting that happiness or unhap-
piness as the probable result of an action must enter into
the motivation, was misunderstood from the very ﬁrst. Bott,
a contemporary of his, thinks that Wollaston is forced to
desert the standard of truth, which he started out to main-
tain, and to accept in its stead the standard of happiness.
He thinks that Wollaston resorts to Hedonism, because there
is no other way by which the importance of truths can be
estimated. That which most promotes human happiness is
the most important. Wollaston thinks that this is only
applying the criterion of truth to alliof life, but this is not
Bott’s interpretation. After considering Wollaston’s intel-

“Sidgwick, Method of Ethics, pp. 100-2. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat.
Delin. p. 19.

“Sidgwick, Method of Ethics, pp. 100—4. Wollaston, Belt. of Nat.
Delmafp. ll, 14, and 19.

“Ibi ., pp. 88-9.

 

180 The Ethics of William Wollaston

lectual criterion, he says, that “it is observable that he does
not always keep strictly to his deﬁnition.” He is, says
Bott, occasionally “forced . . . to vary his notion of mo-
rality; and to consider truth, not merely as truth, but ac-
cording to the importance of it, or its inﬂuence upon the state
and circumstances of men.” ‘5 Wollaston goes so far
towards Hedonism as to deﬁne “Natural Religion to be the
pursuit of happiness, by the practice of reason and truth.” “
In another passage, says Bott, Wollaston says “I have
shown in what the nature of moral good and evil consists,
namely, a conformity or disagreement to truth, and those
things that are coincident with it, reason and happiness.” ‘7
Bott interprets these passages to mean that Wollaston “takes
into his notion of morality, not only the practice of truth,
but also the inﬂuence of that truth upon the welfare and
happiness of mankind. So that morality, according to him,
is the practice of such reason and truth, as will have an in-
ﬂuence upon human happiness.” He says “if there be any
such truth, as in its nature has no inﬂuence this way, nor
can have any, it has nothing to do with morality.” ‘8 Bott
is disposed to accept this view of morality as true, but
he does not see how Wollaston can reconcile it with his
criterion of truth.“ This reconciliation, Wollaston seeks
to effect, by saying that it is true human happiness and true
human welfare that constitutes the most important of all
truths. It is this that constitutes the standard “by which
the importance of truths ought to be measured.” 5°

Wollaston agrees entirely with Bott that all other truths,
except those related to human life are, morally speaking,
relatively unimportant. It by no means follows from this
that truth is not his ultimate criterion, for his treatment of
happiness is objective. This fact Bott entirely overlooks.
It is very signiﬁcant because when happiness is considered

" Bott, Defence of Wollaston’s Notion of Good and Evil, p. 6.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 52.

« Ibid., p. 65.

" Ibid., pp. 40-48.

I
" Bott, Defence of Wollaston’s Notion of Good and Evil, p. 7.
“ Ibid., p. 16.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 181

objectively it becomes an object of knowledge and a relation
to be considered. Bott’s failure to understand Wollaston
is due to the fact that he thinks Wollaston means by con-
formity to truth, conformity to purely abstract formal
truth. That this is by no means the case is provenby his
many illustrations. Wollaston uses abstract propositions
only as representative of values innumerable. There could,
of course, be no real conformity to mere abstract truth, ex-
cept in a formal way, for such truths have no factual exist-
ence and morality must be acts conformable to the facts of _
the universe. Wollaston would agree entirely with what
Bott says about the writing pen. “Indeed, let a truth be
ever so triﬂing, e. g., that the pen I' am writing with is four
inches .long; if I know it, and yet asSert it is but three, I
. am guilty of an immorality: why? Not because I offend
against truth, or assert what is really false, but because I
assert what I think or know to be false; and so am guilty of
such an act, as tends to breed distrust and uneasiness. That
this is the true reason and not the other is evident; because
the guilt would be the same, if, though the pen were really
four inches long, I, through a mistake, thought it was but
three, and yet asserted it was four.” 51 This simply means,
from our author’s point of view, that one must above all else
be true to human relations, the most important of all truths.
Bott is not true to the facts when he says that one does not
offend against truth when he wills to deceive unless the state-
ment made is contrary to fact. “An act which tends to breed
distrust and uneasiness” is false to human relations, morally
speaking the all-important thing. After saying what he does
about even “triﬂing” truths being respected, Bott ought to
appreciate Wollaston’s hesitation to advocate a lie, for
lying tends to disrupt human relations and to reduce the
world to a chaos.52

I think that Bott’s view of Ethics was essentially the
same as that of Wollaston, I' mean as to the naturalness of
morality and as to the ultimate coincidence of truth, good-

“ Bott, Examination of Wollaston’s Notion of Good and Evil, pp. 7-8.
"Ibid, p. 8.

 

182 The Ethics of William Wollaston

ness and happiness. In proof of this I wish to call atten-
tion to the contents of his chief work: “An Answer to the
Rev. Mr. Warbuton’s Divine Legation, &c.,” in which he cen-
sures Warburton for making morality dependent upon the
command of a superior being. There is also an extant ser-
mon of his called, “Morality Founded in the Reason of
Things.”

John Clarke, a contemporary of Bott, makes a similar
criticism of the position of Wollaston. He, too, thinks that
Wollaston ﬁnally resorts to happiness because the intellectual
criterion is inadequate. He says that “the practice of
truth, or conduct conformable to truth” can be recom-
mended, not as a thing desirable in and for itself, without
reference to aught else, but only as a means for the attain-
ing of happiness. This conformity to truth,” Clarke admits.
to be “the way to happiness, the true end of life. He says
that Wollaston, however inconsistently, came ﬁnally to this
view. He says that this is proven by his own case of seek-
ing to determine the difference of crime between stealing a
book and an estate. The importance of the truth violated
he makes to depend upon how much or how little “they con-
duce to happiness.” So he says that Wollaston comes to
the view that conformity to truth receives its value and im-
portance from its tendency to produce happiness.“3 So
Wollaston must ﬁnally grant, says John Clarke, “that what
has in its nature, a tendency to promote the well being and
happiness of mankind, is morally good, and what has a con-
trary tendency, morally evil.” 5“

John Clarke says “supposing every immoral action, and
none but such, did interfere with, or imply a denial of truth,
. . . then indeed the interfering with or denying truth
would be a certain criterion, whereby to distinguish immoral
actions from what is not so; but still the nature of immo—
rality . . . would not consist of that denial, but something
else; for if it did, the degrees too of moral evil would de-
pendupon that only.” There would, on that assumption, be
a concomitant variation between immorality of acts and

“J. Clarke, Exami. of Wollaston’s Notion of Good and Evil, pp. 51-9.
“ Ibid., p. 54.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appiqwss 188

the number of truths denied, which is not true. This proves
that the criterion of morality is not that of conformity to
truth.‘56 Wollaston uses the method of concomitant varia-
tion; but, he, inadvertently, proved thereby, that the real
criterion of morality is happiness rather than truth. Wol-
laston does not pretend, says Clarke, to determine the degrees
of morality by the number of truths aﬂirmed nor the degrees
of immorality “by the number of truths violated, which he
ought to have done, did immorality consist barely and pre-
cisely in the violation of’ truth, as he afﬁrms when he tells
us, that the idea and formal ratio of moral evil consists in
acting a lie.“6 He has thought ﬁt to take in the importance
of truths violated as well as number." The degrees of evil
. . . are as the importance and *' number of truths vio-
lated.” ‘8 The importance of truths is determined by the
principle of happiness. Clarke takes Wollaston to task for
saying that “all denial of truth . . . is . . . immoral.”
This means that happiness becomes the real criterion, be-
cause it alone can determine the importance of the truths
conformed to, or violated.59 There is no immorality in vio-
lating many truths, but only those conducive to human
happiness. There are cases, says Clarke, when the moral
principle of the happiness of mankind demands that we
violate truth. Like Bott he makes a great deal of Wol-
laston’s hesitation to violate truth for even humanity’s
sake."o As a matter of fact his position is that “an abuse
of language is allowable” in such extreme cases. He says
“all sins against truth are not equal, and certainly a little
trespassing upon it in the present case,” a case of saving
a man from a murderer, “for the good of all parties” is
“as little a one as any.” “

“J. Clarke, Exami. of Wollasth Notion of Good and Evil, p. 56.
Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 31.

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 138.

" Ibid., p. 22.

“J. Clarke, Examination of Wollaston’s Notion of Good, p. 59.

" Ibid., pp. 60-3.

" Ibid., p. 51. Bott, Consideration of Wollaston’s Notion, p. 21.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 27.

 

184 TIw Ethics of William Wollaston

IV

AN EXAMINATION OF THE DUALISTIC INTERPRETATION OF -
WOLLASTON

Some of the critics of Wollaston take the position that
there is an ultimate dualism in his system. They are not
entirely agreed as to whether this is a dualism as to the
criterion of morality or as to the ideal of life. The former
say that the moral criterion is a dual one, made up of rea-
son and happiness. The later say that there is a dualism as
to goodness and happiness as the end of life. Wollaston
seems to have thought that truth is the way both to a life
of goodness and to a life of happiness. Happiness enters
into the motivation but objectively, consequently it is not
an aspect of the criterion. Perhaps there is more ground
for the dualistic interpretation “in regard to the goal of
life,” but I think that he had a profound faith in the ulti-
mate coincidence of truth, goodness and happiness.

Sidgwick says that Wollaston clearly recognized “the
duality of the regulative principles in human nature,” a
thing which the Greek and Roman Stoics did not recognize.
The Stoic formula of “living according to nature” is also
his formula, but whereas the Stoics had only one regulative
principle, that of reason, Wollaston has two, reason and
happiness.” Sidgwick says that “here,” in Wollaston’s
book, “for the ﬁrst time, we ﬁnd moral good and natural
good or happiness treated separately as two essentially dis-
tinct objects of rational pursuit and investigation; the
harmony of them being regarded as a matter of religious
faith, not moral knowledge.” 62 His consideration of happi-
ness as a “justly desirable” end, at which every rational
being ought to aim, Sidgwick interprets hedonistically, say-
ing that it “corresponds exactly to Butler’s conception of
self-love as a natural governing impulse. He says, also, that
“the moral arithmetic” with which he compares pleasures and
pains is an endeavor “to make the notion of happiness
quantitatively precise,” and anticipates Benthamism."3

“Sidgwick, His. of Ethics, p. 197.
“Ibid., p. 198.

 

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 185

Falckenberg says that: “To the equation of truth and
morality happiness is added as a third identical member.”
He seems to think that Wollaston makes of happiness an
entirely distinct principle that acts along with truth and
morality. He makes neither truth nor happiness the one
criterion of morality, according to Falckenberg, but they
are both involved.M I do not think that he understands
Wollaston, because he certainly speaks of true and false
pleasures and of morality as true and of immorality as
false.“5 It is also true that Wollaston says that morality
and happiness, as well as truth, are conformity to the nature
of things. True the former are in practical conformity, the
later in theoretical conformity. A rational being contra-
dicts itself when it pursues irrational pleasures or does an
immoral act.66

Hall says that “Wollaston leaves an unresolved antimony
between the ought and happiness. He says plainly that ‘to
make itself happy is a duty which every being, in propor-
tion to its capacity, owes to itself, and which every intelli-
gent being may be supposed to aim at in general,’ but as to
a correspondence between duty and happiness he can only
say: Now, present pleasure is for the present agreeable,
but if it be not true and he who enjoys it must pay more
for it than it is worth, it cannot be good for him. This
therefore cannot be happiness.” And he has a robust faith,
says Hall, that the practice of truth cannot make any being
ultimately unhappy, but Hall thinks that Wollaston’s own
doctrine of probalism, “where certainty is not to be had,”
reveals the fact that the correspondence between truth and
happiness is not so easily proven as his theory demands.67
There is, we must admit an unresolved antimony between
the ought and happiness so far as this life is concerned;
but if the universe is rational consistency will demand that
we believe in the ultimate happiness of the good.68

“Falckenberg, His. of Modern Phil., p. 189.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 13 and 38.
“Ibid., p. 42.

" Ibid., Sec. III, 16. Hall, Christian Ethics, p. 453.
“Ibid., pp. 172—3 and 113—14.

 

186 The Ethics of William Wollaston

I think that some of the writers have inferred that Wol-
laston has a dual criterion because Clarke has. While
Clarke, with the Stoics, afﬁrms the theoretical self-sufﬁciency
of virtue and insists that it is reasonable to choose virtue,
yet he is equally insistent upon the point that men cannot
be expected to choose it, if it be not rewarded with happiness.
Clarke sought to reconcile the apparent contradiction be-
tween reason and happiness, which are irreconcilable from
the purely rationalistic point of view of Stoicism, by bring-
ing in the sanctions of religion, rewards and punishments
of a future life. There is nothing of the kind in Wollaston.
He deals with the problem purely rationalistically and says
of happiness simply that it is reasonable to treat it, like
every other true thing, as what it is, a desirable human
state."9 Men are virtuous when they act according to the
nature of things. Happiness, of course, both in this life and
in the life to come will be the natural result of a life lived
truly, but such prospects are not treated as the necessary
incentive to make one do his duty.70 Clarke just brought in
happiness as a sanction, whereas Wollaston did not, that
is the main difference between the two philosophers. In the
main they agree even as to the subject of happiness. “The
Deity,” says Clarke, “acts according to the eternal rela-
tions of things, in order to the welfare of the whole uni-
verse,” and subordinate moral agents ought” to be governed
by the same rules for the good of the public.” He thus, very
rightly, sees the social order as a part of the divine order,
moral rules as a part of a higher rationality.71 I' would
agree with Burnett that this is just about the way Wollas-
ton thought of the general happiness of mankind. He says
that, according to Wollaston, what makes the desire of
public happiness a reasonable end is the truth “that it is
best that all should be happy. That it is best that all
should be happy is necessarily perceivable by all rational
natures.” 72

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 38—4-0. Clarke, Evidences, p. 14.
"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 37-40.

'1 Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, 482.

" Burnett, Art. in London Journal, p. 214.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 187

After, to all appearance, completely understanding the
moral principle of Wollaston to be an objective one, that of
conformity of life to the nature of things, Erdmann then
proceeds to say that he brought in happiness as an addi-
tional principle. He says that Wollaston made the distinc-
tion between basing morality upon a subjective basis, of an
inner imperative or a priori laws of morality, and of basing
it on an objective foundation. Since there are no common
principles innate in the mind of man morality must be based
on the objective foundation of conformity to nature. But,
says Erdmann, this distinction seems not to have satisﬁed
Wollaston and so he introduces into his ethics still another
idea, the idea of happiness. He, now, tries to prove “that
seeking happiness coincides with the realization of truth (das
Suchen Gliicklichkeit mit dem Verwirklichen der Wahrheit
zusammenfalle).” Both, he says, are so bound up together
that neither is thinkable without the other, and the one is
determined by the other. Erdmann interprets Wollaston as
believing that virtue is its own reward, but that he “is not
content with this, but points also to the reward which such
action is to have. This reward consists in happiness, the
balance of pleasure over pain.” He then undertakes to
explicate Wollaston’s treatment of happiness. In order
to deﬁne the idea of happiness he starts, says Erdmann, with
pleasure and he arrives at the conclusion that happiness is
nothing but the sum of true pleasures. Happiness, since
pains must be considered, consists in the excess of pleasure
over pain, namely, in pure and true pleasure. “This cannot
exist in something which contradicts one’s own nature
(Dieses kann nicht in Etwas bestehn, was der eignen Natur
widerspricht); Whatever conﬂicts with one’s own nature or
is destructive of it cannot be pleasant, and just therefore it
cannot render one happy.” 73 Erdmann thinks that Wollas-
ton does not really prove the proposition that combines the
principle of happiness and that of truth. In order to prove
the coincidence of happiness and truth, Wollaston, he thinks,
is compelled to resort ﬁnally to the idea of God. He tries
to show that if a creature were unhappy by opposing its own

"Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, pp. 118-20.

 

188 The Ethics of William Wollaston

nature and God’s plans, it would thereby show itself more
powerful than God, which would be absurd. That there is a
gap here, Erdmann thinks, cannot be denied; and it is due,
he thinks, to the fact that Wollaston “stand here on the
threshold, so to speak, which leads to a more advanced view
of ethics which, with an empirical basis, is inevitable, namely,
pure Eudzemonism. But only on the threshold, and there-
fore he asserts throughout, that the objective nature of
things determines actions, at the same time, however, he
already divines, that the determining factor is only one’s
own pleasure.” 7“

It is very interesting that Erdmann should differ so ab-
solutely in his conception of happiness in Wollaston’s sys-
tem, from Hume and from English Hedonists generally.
While they take the position that Wollaston neglects feel-
ing as the necessary dynamic to action, Erdmann criticizes
him on the very ground that his Eudazmonism is mixed with
Hedonism, that while his ideal and criterion of morality is
objective he still thinks that the subjective principle of
pleasure largely determines actions. Erdmann thinks that
Wollaston found himself in the same difﬁculty in which
Mill found himself, years afterwards, I mean in regard to
the gap between psychological and ethical Hedonism.
Everyone desires pleasure, this is a psychological fact, but
what is there that is ethical about it? And how can we
reason from that evident psychological fact to the moral
idea that everyone should seek the greatest happiness of
the greatest number? Mill, as is well known, made the leap
by a fallacy of Ambiguous Middle, namely, by giving
“desired” and “desirable” the same connotation.“5 Erd-
mann represents Wollaston as ﬁnding as a connecting link
(“Mittleglied”) the fact that pleasure and pain are only
“what is in accord with one’s own nature and purpose (was
der eignen Natur und Bestimmung entspreche).” 7" Erd-
mann says that “this Mittleglied, however, remains an as-

" Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, pp. 117-8. Hume, Treatise
on Human Nature, p. 462.

7‘ Mill, Utilitarianism, p. 53.

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 39.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on Happiness 189

surance only.” He says that Wollaston thinks that he has
established'the truth of the position and proceeds as if he
had really proved, What he only postulates, that truth and
happiness coincide. He goes on in his depiction of Wollas-
ton: “Only that can give true happiness what is in accord
with the purpose of the being. If the being is of a double
nature, animal and human, like man, the principle of truth
would require that true happiness could be realized only by
that which is in accord with his noble part (was der Be—
stimmung seines edlern Theils entspricht). Therefore only
that makes men happy which corresponds with reason. If
the irrational gives man pleasure, he thereby contradicts
hime (Macht dem Menschen das Unverniinftige Verg—
niigen, so setzt er sich mit selbst in Widerspruch). By the
enjoyment of the irrational pleasure one declares himself
to be an irrational being (ein unverniinftiges Wesen), which
is an untrue proposition.” 77 It may be that Wollaston did
not take the position that immorality is the afﬁrmation of a
false proposition, but rather that it is a practical denial
of a true proposition, 9. very different thing.78

Erdmann thinks that Wollaston has faith in the rational-
ity of the universe and that this faith is Natural Religion.
“Since the realization of truth and the seeking of happiness
are one and the same thing, all Natural Religion is based
on the harmony of truth, reason and happiness; and, as
real deﬁnition, it is declared that it is the seeking of happi-
ness through the realization of truth and reason (das Suchen
der Gliickseligkeit durch Verwirklichen der Wahrheit und
Vernunft).”79 From Erdmann’s previous discussion, we
would not have expected him to agree to this hedonistic deﬁ-
nition of religion. This deﬁnition certainly subordinates
truth to happiness, whereas Erdmann has, so far, inter-
preted Wollaston as treating them as dual principles of
morality. The only possible way of reconciling these very
different interpretations is to say that Erdmann under-

"Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 117. Wollaston, Reli.
of Nat. Delin., pp. 39-40.

"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 9. Ibid., p. 52.
"Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 119.

 

190 The Ethics of William Wollaston

stands Wollaston, to not only subordinate truth to happi-
ness, but to make of morality itself only a necessary means
to happiness and not an end in itself. It is not unfair to
say that Wollaston considers reason in an instrumental way,
that is, as instrumental to the realization of life. He does
not agreed with Kant that the actual literal truth should
be told in every case in life. While he hesitates to violate
the least truth, still verbal truth is subordinated to life’s
true meanings.80 While Wollaston does treat truth instru-
mentally, it is not true that he ever subordinates truth to
happiness in his moral system. If there is any subordination
it is the other way, and Erdmann’s own interpretation,
taken as a whole, conveys that impression. Happiness is
good only when founded on truth, on the real nature of
things. This is undoubtedly Wollaston’s position.81
Vorliinder takes a position very similar to that of Erd-
mann, in fact there is some evidence of dependence of the one
on the other. Vorlblnder, though, differs from Erdmann in
that he does not ﬁnd Wollaston at all self-contradictory in
his treatment of truth and happiness. He says that Wollas-
ton was able to show that “the moral aim of truth coincides
with that of happiness (das mit dem sittlichen Ziel der
Wahrheit das der Gliickseligkeit zusammenfalle),” because
a being can be called happy “only when his pleasures are
true.” “2 Vorliinder is very true to Wollaston in his inter-
pretation in that he says that true happiness is to be found,
not so much in freedom from pain or in excess of pleasure
over pain, but in conformity to the nature of personality
and to the nature of things. “The true and highest happi-
ness of a being cannot be produced by something which con-
tradicts truth and denies the nature of things (Das wahre
und hochste Gliick eines Wesens kann nicht durch etwas her-
vorgebracht werden, was der Wahrheit widerspricht und die
N atur der Dinge velengnet).” Vorliinder interprets Wollas-

'° Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 28.
“Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., p. 119. Wollaston, Reli. of N at.
Delin., pp. 38-9.

38" Ibid., p. 38. Vorliinder, Gesch. der Philosophischen Moral, etc., p.
5.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimss 191

ton to mean that the true happiness of any man must be
found in that which “is not incongruous with its nature (das
nicht unvertraglich ist mit seiner Natur),” but in those
activities which correspond to the purpose and meaning of
human life. It is, says Vorlander, absolutely essential to’
morality that a man ﬁnd his “echte Glﬁck” in that which is
consistent with his “nobler part,” with his “reason.” He
understands Wollaston to mean that a rational being can-
not ﬁnd delight in those pleasures which are irrational with-
out contradicting its own nature, which practically means
that a man cannot get real happiness except from that which
is consistent with reason. “Daher macht den Menschen nur
das gliicklich, was der Vernunft entspricht.” So, he says,
the way to happiness and the exercise of truth merge, and
that Natural Religion is based on the unity of them in the
furtherance of human welfare, “die menschliche N atur zu
fordren.” 8"

In the article on Ethics in the Britannica Williams takes
the position that “the dualism of governing principles, con-
science and self-love, in Bishop Butler’s system, and perhaps,
too, his revival of the Platonic conception of human nature
as an ordered and governed community of impulses, is per-
haps most nearly anticipated in Wollaston’s ‘Religion of
Nature Delineated.’ Here for the ﬁrst time, we ﬁnd ‘moral
good’ and ‘natural good’ or ‘happiness’ treated separately
as two essentially distinct objects of rational pursuit; the
harmony between them being regarded as a matter of reli-
gious faith.” 8‘ I thinkthat this criticism can be best an-
swered by showing the connection of the ethical philosophy
of Wollaston with the entire stream of moral thought of the
time, particularly its relations to the systems of Cudworth
and Shaftesbury. Wollaston took the position that there is
truth in both of these supposedly conﬂicting systems, and
that a true moral philosophy must be a higher synthesis of
the two. Now, Cudworth had presented the principle of
social duty as abstract reason, intuition as liable to conﬂict ‘

" Vorlﬁnder, Gesch. der Philosophischen Moral, etc., p. 886.
" Williams, Art. Ethics in Britan.

 

19$ The Ethics of William Wanastan

with the desire of happiness.“5 Shaftesbury, on the other
hand, tried to show the naturalness of man’s social aﬁecv
tions and to prove that there is no contradiction between
his social aﬂ'ections and his self-regardingimpulses.86 Wol~
laston looked the situation over and reached the conclusion
that if reason he thought of as a faculty which is to perceive
the real natures of things and, in the light of. our relations
to them, determine our duty, then both the emotional im-v
pulses that prompt to social duty and the a priori rational
principle that demands that men’s acts be consistent will. be
realized." *

V

THE ETHICS OF WOLLASTON BECONCILES BATIONALIéM AND
HEDONIBH

In this division of my treatise I wish to defend the thesis
that the Ethics of Wollaston is really a reconciliation of
the two equally extreme positions of Rationalism and
Hedonism.‘ ‘ r

Ethical Rationalism takes two forms, an extreme and a
moderate. According to the extreme form of Rationalism
the good life is a life of pure reason from which all semi-
hility has been eliminated. Moderate Rationalism, on the
other hand, teaches that, while the good life contains semi-
bility as an element, it is fundamentally rational, a life of
sensibility guided by the reason. The ancient Stoics 'and the
modern Kant are good examples of the former and Clarke
and Wollaston are good examples of the latter. -Wollaston’s
rationalism is very far from Intuitionalism for he does not
believe in innate ideas of morality. He is a Rationalist in
the sense that the reason is thought by him to be the guide
in life, but he thinks of reason as dependent upon exPerienoe
for its data. Knowledge is a rational organization of ex-
perience, according to Wollaston, and morality is determined

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 38-9. Cudworth, Intel. System,
pp. 730-4. 1

" Shaftesbury, Enqui Concerning Virtue, Part II, Sec. 3.

" Wollaston, Reli. of at. Delini, pp. 19 and 45-6.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section. 013 H appiness 198

by the nature of things, the knowledge of which is thus at-
tained. He treats sensibility in the same way. It is neces-
sary to the realization of life and should be treated as what
it is, a true aspect of human life. The reason, however,
must be given the entire emphasis in the evaluation of con-
duct, Wollaston thinks, in that it alone can control the life
of sensibility. So far from being an ascetic he says that
the good life is a life of sensibility guided by the reason.88
Sidgwick considers it a' characteristic diﬂ'erence between
ancient Stoicism and “modern British Ethics that the former
considered only the universal reason, whereas the latter con-
siders both the universal reason and the egoistic reason.
This is true, in general, but I think that it must be said that
with Wollaston the principle of happiness is as much uni-
versalized and rationalized as is the universal reason. His
principle is that happiness just like anything else is to be
treated as what it is.“ ‘ ‘ - ‘ ‘
The relation of reason to the rest of life is stated by Pro-
fessor Seth in a way that would, I think, entirely meet the
approval of Wollaston: “The assertion, which is repeated
again and again in the rational school, of the dignity and
independence of man as a rational being, is a sublime and
momentous truth. ' For'man rises out of nature, and has to
assert his inﬁnite rational superiority to nature. ‘ Goodness
means the subjugation of nature to spirit. The good life is
thesrational life; the life of mere nature is, in a rational be-
ing, irrational. And it may well seem, in the great crises
of the struggle, as if all else but the rational self were un-
worthy to live, and must absolutely die. Yet nature also
has its ethical function; and the moral life is not so stern
and joyless as Stoic and Kantian moralists would say.” 9°
Wollaston says that “nothing can be the true happiness of
a rational being, that is inconsistent with reason. .i . . If
anything becomes agreeable to a rational being, which is
not agreeable to reason, it is plain his reason is lost, his
nature deprest, and that he now lifts himself among irra-
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 45.

" Sidgwick, His. of Ethics, pp. 196-7.
"Seth, Ethical Principles, p. 179.

 

194.- The Ethics of William Wollaston

tionals, . . . a rational being can like nothing of that kind
without a contradiction to itself.” “1

Wright takes a position in regard to the relation of sen-
sibility and reason that is very similar to the position of
Seth and well states the attitude of Wollaston on the ques-
tion. “When the rationalist recommends the life of reason
as the highest human good he inevitably thinks of this in-
tellectual activity as superior to feeling and sensation. He
is bound to insist, therefore, that the demands of feeling
and sense be strictly subordinated to the requirements of
reason. An extreme rationalism has sometimes claimed that
a free exercise of reason, in which consists the highest good,
would demand the complete suppression of all natural feel-
ings, impulses and desires. “A moderate rationalism ﬁnds
the good in control rather than in the entire suppression of
the life of sense and feeling.” “2 Wright grants that intel-
lectualism has often fallen into several faults, namely, asceti-
cism and individualism; but he very truly says, that the
faults of the opposing systems have been far greater.

The prerogative of a human being is to be able to guide
his life by the law of universal reason. This is due entirely
to man’s possessing reason, and it is reason alone which dif-
ferentiates man from the rest of the animal kingdom. A
purely animal life is determined entirely from without by
sensory stimuli; and if man were merely animal, his life,
too, would be guided by instincts and sensibility. Man, of
course, is both animal and human and this is the explanation
of the war among his members. A To be human and moral is
to guide the life by reason, instead of allowing it to be
determined from below by the senses and instincts. But Wol-
laston’s position is superior to that of Stoicism and of
asceticism generally, in that it does not utterly disregard
man’s lower nature, but rather seeks to realize it as well as
man’s higher nature. All of life, sentient as well as rational,
must have its true and proper place in the completely reali-

“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 39.

“Wright, Self-Realization, p. 113. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delia,
p. 40.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimss 195

ized life. Because it is reason which diﬁ'erentiates man from
the rest of the animal kingdom, his life must therefore, to
be human and to be moral, be guided by reason rather than
by sense; but it does not follow from this that the entire
animal nature must be disregarded in the realization of the
moral life. Much of the life of sensibility, thinks Wollas-
ton, is entirely rational, in the sense that a rational world
requires its due and proper expression. When Wollaston
says that for acts to be moral they must be rational he has
reference not to their rational form but to their conformity
to the real natures of things. He says, that not the motive
alone but all the consequences must be considered in the de~
termination of the character of an act. A rational being
ought to act rationally, means that he must always act in
such a way as tends to fulﬁll his rational nature. Such
actions are those which are conformable to the nature of
things, and the choice of actions calculated to result in hu-
man happiness is, therefore, as rational as any other when
the happiness is true; but it is contrary both to the laws
of universal reason and to the nature of things for a ra-
tional being to enjoy an irrational pleasure.93

The position has often been taken that there is no middle
ground between extreme formal and ascetic Rationalism, on
the one hand, and Hedonism on the other. I think that
there. is such a middle course and that Wollaston has taken
it. He used the methods of logic and insisted upon the ab-
solute preeminence of the rational aspect of human nature,
but he, also, insisted that the whole of man must be taken
into consideration in treating a man as what he is. Wollas-
ton says that a man must be thought of not just as a reason-
ing being, but also as a person with feelings and desires that
must be considered in the realization of personality. But
this does not mean that he went over to Hedonism, nor that
he regarded the reasoning powers of man as but means to
the securing of happiness. Man’s reason is also to be
treated as what it is, treated as an end as well as a means.
He took the position that consequences, in so far as they

“Wollaston, Bell. of N at. Delin., p. 89.

 

196 The Ethics of William Wollaston

can be anticipated, should be considered, and certainly one
cannot act rationally without the due consideration of al
possible consequences, sentient and rational. ‘
Professor Fite says: “The being who acts rationally acts
consistent with principle, and his rule of conduct is: Let
your conduct be constantly determined by principle.” 95-
The question is, did Wollaston think of a rational being as a
mere reasoning being in the sense of purely formal logic?
“The Kantian being,” says Fite, “is, in fact, the personiﬁ-
cation of the syllogism. As such he is indifferent to the
nature of his conclusions, provided only thatothey are de-
duced without contradiction from his premises; he is in—
different to the ends attained by his conduct, providedonly
that his conduct be self-consistent.” Fite says that there
are no such beings as this, that a being of this kind is a
psychological impossibility."6 Wollaston’s criterion of mo~
rality is that of consistency, but this principle is not con-
cerned with the principle alone but with consequences. The
“good will,” the intention, constitutes an important facto
but the objective factor is of equal impartance." ‘
Wollaston’s Ethics is that of self-realization, understand-
ing thereby “that the realization of the self is the realiza-
tion of the purpose implied in the capacities of one’s nature.
. . .' Life as a whole will be an attempt to attain a complete,
perfect and harmonious expression of all this several capaci-
ties.” The one who has this ideal of complete self-realiza—
tion for all men, as has Wollaston, “is not,” as Fite well
says, “impartial with regard to his premises, nor indifferent
with regard to the ends to be achieved, but on the contrary,
distinctly prejudiced in favor of those ends which are im-
plied in his fundamental tendencies and capacities... These
constitute the premises of his reason and their consistent
realization constitutes the rational process.” “8 Moral ac-

“ Fite, Intro. Study of Ethics, 170.

" Ibid., p. 206. 7

" Kant, Critique of Practical Reason, Pt. I, Bk. II, Ch. 2. Wollaston,
Reli. of Nat. Dclin., p. 19. ' ~ ‘ '

" Fite, Intro. Study of Ethics, pp. 198-9. Wollaston, Reli. of Nat.
Delin., pp. 37-9.

 

Exposition of Wollaston’s Section on H appimu 197

tivity is consistent conforfnity to rational principles, but
this is not just logical consistency, that is, consistency
merely for consistency’s sake. This involves the realization
of concrete life desires and feelings as well as logical con-
sistency. This simply means that the Ethics of Wollaston
was objective as well as subjective. He would not admit that
a life could be denominated moral.on the basis of consis-
tency, which failed to take into consideration human in-
stincts, desires and feelings and evaluated conduct purely '
subjectively and formally; but he would insist that in the
good life every kind of consequence that can be anticipated
enters somewhat into the motivation.”

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 37 and 128.

 

“___7,.l._.i, .Ugwwn -w

PRACTICAL RELIGION AND PRACTICAL
MORALITY

Under this head I am including Wollaston’s teachings of
a practical nature in sections VI, VII, VIII and IX, which
includes a very large part of the book, namely, from the
128th to the 214th page. The teachings of this practical
part of his book may be stated summarily in these words:
How to so live this life that one may realize the possibili-
ties of life; this can be done only by living happily and well
and in right relations with the world of things, with all man-
kind and with God.

SECTION VI

“'rEU'rHs EESPECTING MANKIND IN GENERAL, ANTECEDENT
To ALL HUMAN LAWS”

Wollaston begins this section of his work with a discus-
sion of the principle of individuation, which for our pur-
poses means simply this, since the natures and circumstances
are different, duty is somewhat different for each man. This
does not mean that there is no universal principle, but rather
that one aspect of this universal principle of morality
is that individuality is a thing that must be always con-
sidered in determining duty. Wollaston, after establishing
the supreme worth of the individual, proceeds to universalize
this principle of individuation and to make the general good
the test of morality. He says that “whatever is incon-
sistent with the general peace and welfare or good, is incon-
sistent with the laws of human nature, wrong and intoler-
able.” He seems to go still further towards Utilitarianism
when he says that, “those maxims may be esteemed natural
and true laws of any particular society, which are most
proper to procure happiness to it. Because happiness is

198

 

Practical Rel' ' and Practical M orality 199

the end of society and laws; otherwise we might suppose
unhappiness to be proposed as the right end of them; that
is, unhappiness to be desirable, contrary to nature and
truth.” 1 Wollaston is not giving up the idea of conformity
to nature as the moral criterion, but he is taking pre-
cisely the same attitude towards happiness that he took in
the section on happiness, namely, that it should be treated
as what it is. Now happiness in human society is very de-
sirable, consequently the principle of conformity to the na-
ture of things would say that to treat happiness as the
important thing that it is would be to seek its realization.
That he is using the same logic and the same criterion in
this section that he used in the previous sections is evident
from this statement: “It is contradictory to say that any-
thing can be a general law of nature,” which does not make
for the general happiness of men, “who partake of the same
common nature. . . . The transgression of these laws, con-
ducing to the general good of the world, is wrong and mor-
ally e ' .” For if mankind be differentiated from the rest
of the animal kingdom by reason, then the general welfare
of mankind “must be the welfare of the rational nature
and therefore that, and the laws which advance it, must be
founded in reason.” The only rule by which mankind could
govern itself for the general good of the world, “would be
one conformable to the nature and circumstances of man-
kind, that is a principle founded on reason.” 2

Wollaston anticipates Kant in bringing in the test “of uni-
versality. He asks: “What would be the consequence, if
all men should transgress this rule?” He answers that the
result would be, “a general evil, or something disagreeable
to our nature and the truth of our circumstances, for of
contrary practices there must be contrary eﬁ'ects.” Who-
soever should violate that rule, “would contribute his share
towards the introduction of universal disorder and misery,”
and would for his part deny human life to be what it is,
would deny human society to be what it is, and human hap-
piness to be what it is. Because the world is coherent, act-

1 Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 128.
' Ibid., p. 129.

 

WAAM‘ - “4“”.—

200 The Ethics of William Wands!”

ing rationally is both the way to rectitude and the 'way to
happiness. Acts that are disagreeable to truth are wrong
and tend to make men unhappy.3 Selby-Bigge says that
Wollaston constantly confuses the violation of truth, which
constitutes immorality for him, with another kind of ab—
surdity, namely, “untruthfulness.” Strange to say Selby-
Bigge takes the position that “untruthfulness” . . . can
certainly be practiced without absurdity though it cannot
be imagined a universal practice without some absurdity;
lying would cease to be proﬁtable to the liar if no one spoke
the truth or expected others to speak the truth.” ** Selby-
Bigge fails both in his understanding of Wollaston and of
Kant. Wollaston does not claim that all absurdity is ime
moral but only that immorality is essentially absurd, for it
is as self-contradictory as intellectual self-contradiction?
His understanding of Kant is not correct. He understands
Kant to teach that things can only be denominated wrong
from the point of view of the social chaos that would result
from their universalisation. It is true, both for Wollaston
and for Kant, that it is the exceptional nature of the‘ act
which makes it morally wrong, but that daes not‘meanthat
it would have to be practiced by everybody before it
would become absurd behavior and so morally wrong. The
one immoral act is absurd precisely because it could not
become universal. One may, with Kant and Wollaston,
consider that the consequences of the universalization oi
immorality would be the disruption of society, but the par-
ticular immoral act is absurd and immoral precisely because
it is exceptional. So our author seeks merely to delineate
the nature of morality by comparing it to truth. Morality
is like truth in that it is conformable to the nature of things,
but the one consists of thoughts and the other of acts. To
act immorally is to treat things, as Clarke expresses it, as
they are not and cannot be.6 Society would go to pieces if
men generally acted otherwise than in conformity with true

'Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 14.8.

‘ Selby-Bigge, English Thought in the 18th 0611., p. xxxii.
“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 15 and 23. '
' Clarke, Nat. Reli. in British Moralists, 489.

 

Practical Religion and Practical! Morality 201

relations. Wollaston thinks that canwimmoral act denies the
indissoluble unity of» life, and the world and practically
afﬁrms the universe to be a chaos, not a cosmos.7

' SECTION VII -

“TRUTHs .BESPECTING PARTICULAR soqIETIEs or MEN AND OF
GOVERNMENTS”

Wollaston takes up in this section the treatment of man
as a social creature. He takes the position that man cannot
live well except in the society of his fellows. He says that
it would 'be “quite impossible to live a life of the highest
order, a life Of the reason, a life enriched by the arts and
sciences, except in society. “He says a good many things Of
a utilitarian nature: “The end Of society is the common
welfare and good Of the peOple associated,” and all the laws
and customs of that society must be evaluated from'that
point Of view.8 ' '

SECTION VIII

“TRuTns CONCERNING FAMILIES AND RELATIONs”

The teachings Of this section are Of very much the same
nature as 'thoSe in the previous section. They are even more
concrete and practical, and consists of practical advice in
regard to rearing a family. Presumably Wollaston was
competent to speak on the subject since he was the father
Of eleven children.“ ’

SECTION IX

“TRUTHs REsPECTINO A PRIVATE MAN, AND BESPECTING
(DIRECTLY) ONLY HIMsELE”

This is the longest section in the book. Were this all that
we have from Wollaston we‘might aCcuse him Of individual-
ism. The practical teachings Of the section are naturally Of

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 128 and 148.

' Ibid., pp. 145—53.
’ Ibid., pp. 154-66.

 

202 The Ethics of William Wollaston

a prudential nature, reminding one somewhat of those manu-
als of wholesome advice once so common. He says that a
man ought to consider “all that he is, in possibility, that he
is an animal, but that he is also a rational creature.” He
will ﬁnd from experience that his instincts, desires and pas-
sions are apt to take him in the wrong direction. If he is
to be true to his real nature he must subject his animal na-
ture to the law of reason. He will ﬁnd that acting according
to reason will coincide with acting according to truth, or
the true nature of things.10 As I have said there is a good
deal of the prudential in this section. “A man must,” says
Wollaston, “take care not to bring upon himself want, dis-
ease, trouble; but must provide for his comfortable subsis-
tence, as far as he can without contradicting any truth, that
is deny any matter of fact.” 11 A man must not act as if
he were “a sensitive being only, but also as a sensitive-rational
being.” Physical satisfactions are, however, to be enjoyed,
and it is irrational to despise such things. “Bodily inclina-
tions and passions, when they observe their due subordina-
tion to reason, and only take place, where that leaves it
open for them, or allows them to be, as it were, assessors to
it upon the throne, are of admirable use in life, and tend
many times to noble ends.” 12 .

Wollaston dwells upon the dangers of temptation and
the weakness of the ﬂesh, and gives some practical advice on
meeting temptation and the duty of self-denial.13 “Every
man is obliged to live virtuoust and piously, because to
practice reason and truth is to live after that manner.”
The man who practices reason behaves himself both rever-
ently and dutifully.14 To live virtuously is to practice rea-
son and act conformany to truth, and he who lives so must
be ultimately happy, so both the commands of reason and
the desire for happiness will oblige a man to live conformany
to truth.“5 “The natural and usual effect of virtue is hap-

"’ Wollaston, Relin. of Nat. Delin., pp. 167-9.
“ Ibid., p. 171.

1’ Ibid., pp. 172-3.

1' Ibid., pp. 175-7.

1‘ Ibid., p. 179.

1"Ibid., p. 181.

 

 

 * “he-U u: 4 4‘--.‘.a.___.h........w Hr--. «can.-.

Practical Religion and Practical Morality ‘ 208

piness; and if a virtuous man should in some respects be
unhappy, yet still his virtue will make him less unhappy;
for at least he enjoys inward tranquillity.” 1“ Overton says
that Wollaston argued for immortality on the ground that
some place is demanded by reason “where the proper amends
could be made.” 17 And Wollaston, himself, says, that “He
who would act according to truth, must not only consider
what he is, and how circumstanced in this present state,
and provide accordingly; but, further, must consider him-
self also as one whose existence proceeds on into another,
and provide for that too.” 18
1"Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 182.

" Overton, His. of the Eng. Church 1714-1800, p. 36.
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 218.

 

THE METAPHYSICAL TEACHIN GS OF
WOLLASTON -

Only such metaphysical teachings r of Wollaston as “are
indissolubly bound up with his ethics are here considered.
It is impossible to treat ethical problems without some con-
sideration being given to more ultimate problems. Selby-
Bigge characterizes this period of English ethics as unmeta-
physical.1 This is true in the sense that the Eighteenth
Century British moralists gave little attention to meta-
physical discussions, but this was because they took their
metaphysics for granted. Professor Perry says that it is
characteristic of the English to treat each case on its own
merit and apparently without reference to theory.2 This
does not mean that the Englishman, and this is especially
true of the Eighteenth Century moralists, has no episte-
mology nor metaphysics in mind when he philosophizes about
moral matters. He is not so departmental in his thinking
as many have thought, nor is he destitute of ideas concerning
ultimate reality. The Englishman is generally concrete
in his treatment of ethics, but he has general ideas in mind
and his general view of the world is always clearly implicated.
Wollaston is typical in this respect and it can be clearly
shown that he was aware of the metaphysical implications
of his ethical philosophy.

In general, it may be said that the Enlightenment ac-
cepted the Cartesian dualistic view of the world. Most of
the philosophers just took that for granted and made it
the presupposition of all their practical philosophy. Wol-
laston was a true representative of the Enlightenment. Per-
haps Blakey’s statement» of his position is a very fair char-
acterization in most respects. He says that Wollaston

‘ Selby-Bigge, English Thou t in the 18th Cen., p. XIX.

' Perry, Present Conﬂict of deals, ch. XXXII.

204

 

 

The Metaphysical Teacth of =Wollaston 205

belongs to the class of theoretical moralists rather than
metaphysicians. But, says Blakey, his ethical speculation
rested upon a system of metaphysics “that might be classi—
ﬁed as the epistemology of. common sense. and as metaphysi—
cal dualism. »Its fundamental principles are that. man is
constituted of two elements, mind and body, the former of
which is thought of as a real spiritual entity; that'it has in-
nate powers of reﬂection,-and notions of right and wrong,
good and evil, irrespective of the inﬂuence of the senses,
or the conventional rules of society. ‘ He believes in the
stability of the laws of nature and that everything in the
world is regulated by inﬁnite wisdom. His system of ethics
is grounded on a simple metaphysical principle that truth
in everything is to be in conformity with the constituted
order of nature.” He says also that Wollaston insists that
“Every act of a rational being must be the act of one cap-
able of‘ distinguishing and choosing by the pOWers of one’s
own will.” 3 I agree entirely with this interpretation, with
the exception of the statement in regard toman’s mind pos-
sessing .“notions of right and wrong, good and evil.” There
is a certain idealism in Wollaston’s Weltanschanung, of
that there can be no doubt, but it was of the theistic type
and therefore thought to be consistent with dualism.
.Morell classiﬁes Wollaston with the idealists and, it must
be admitted, has very good grounds for so doing because
Wollaston temches that truth is the moral criterion and that
there is an ultimate coincidence between truth, goodness and
happiness.‘ Idealism is involved, Morell thinks, in Wollas—
ton’s thought that there are certain ﬁxed relations in the
universe, cognizable byrthe human mind, and that virtue con—
sists in acting conformany thereto. Ultimate coherency, a
consistent world order, is the presupposition of a system of
moralityrbased on. truth as a criterion, when truth is con-
ceived. of as Wollaston conceives it, namely, not as an innate
idea but as ascertained truth involving both experience and
reason.‘5 «This is true because truth in actuality is the pre-

' Blakey, His. of Phil., vol. III, 1, 3, 7 and 8.

‘Morell, His. of Modern Phil.
' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 51 and 4-5-6.

 

206 The Ethics of William Wollaston,

condition of truth being found by empirical and rational
processes. The fact that Wollaston insists upon both the
rationality of morality and upon the objectivity of it de-
mands an ultimate idealism as a metaphysics, because for
morality to be both reasonable and in conformity to the na-
ture of things both minds and things must belong to one all-
comprehending world of meaning, one coherent world order.8
It is in the very nature of things, as Clarke says, that is,
in the very nature of reality and man, that moral distinc—
tions are founded. The individual soul stands to the rest of
nature in the relation of subject and object, the perceiving
mind and the things perceived. The universe is rational,
there is a certain preestablished harmony between minds and
things, and the same reason which pervades the whole exists
also in each individual mind. This is the metaphysical
presupposition of knowledge in general and of moral knowl-
edge in particular, when conceived objectively as Wollas-
ton conceives it.''

As we have seen, Wollaston conceives of the world relations
as grounded in theism. “If there is a supreme being, upon
whom the existence of the world depends; and nothing can
be in it but what He either causes, or permits to be; then to
own things to be as they are is to own what He causes; and
this is to take things as He gives them, to go into His con—
stitution of the world, and to submit to His will revealed in
the books of nature. . .. . The owning of things, in all our
conduct, to be as they are is obedience . . . to the Author of
Nature. . . . Things cannot be denied to be what they are
. . without contradicting truths eternal.” And since God
has “constituted” things as they are the violation of the
nature of things “is to act in opposition . . . to His nature.” 8

Wollaston’s conception of the universe is involved in his
conception of the relation of morality and religion. In a
sense his view of the relation of morality and religion is
that of Deism, namely, the practical identiﬁcation of the
two. It is also true, however, that he begins his work with

'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Della, p. 94-.
' Clarke, Natural Reli., p. 49.
' Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delia, p. 8.

 

 

The Metaphysical Teacth of Wollaston 207

a statement of the relation of the two that is so like Kant’s
conception of that relation that some thinkers are inclined
to believe that Kant derived his conception from Wollaston.
How like Kant are these opening words of The Religion of
Nature Delineated: “The foundation of religion lies in that
difference between the acts of men, which distinguish them
into good, evil and indifferent. For if there is such a dif-
ference, there must be religion!” Like Kant, he takes the
position that morality is imperative and indubitable in its
demands and that the necessary implications of the moral
consciousness are equally imperative and indubitable. Kant
says that the postulates of the moral law are God, freedom
and immortality. Wollaston says “the foundation of re-
ligion lies in the difference which men naturally and neces-
sarily make between good and evil. But while Wollaston,
like Kant, starts from the practical side, he would not like
him say that the moral proof is the only proof, that the
theoretical reason is inadequate. He would not say that
religion is dubious when theoretically considered and that
the great tenets of religion can only be established by the
moral proof. Wollaston thinks that what Kant called the
pure reason is really the only kind of reason; he believes,
however, that there are two elements in the reason, the em-
pirical and the rational. This reason, he thinks, is able to
tell us both what is true and what we ought to do. Wollas-
ton seeks to delineate the religion of nature, that is to both
rationalize and moralize religion. Kant sought to prove
God, freedom and immortality by the moral proof. Wol-
laston’s position is rather that any kind of proof must be
capable of intellectualization, for morality itself is based
on an intellectual foundation or an objective basis, not an
intuitional basis as Kant thought. Moral and religious
convictions to be sure, are held by those who have not worked
out the full metaphysical implications of those convictions,
which implications constitute an essential part of those con-
victions.9

’ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 6, 48-9, 52 and 61. Kant, Kritik

d. Prakt. Vernuft, Werke II, 132 ﬁ'., 149 ﬁ‘. Kant, Grundlegung zur
Metaphysik der Sitten, 2 Abschn., Werke.

 

THE EPISTEMOLOGY OF WOLLASTON
SECTION III

“or nnasonmo, AND THE wars or mscovnamo TRUTH”

This section of Wollaston’s book is really epistemological
in nature, as the heading indicates, and it is not especially
signiﬁcant for ethics. But it is interesting and signiﬁcant
that Wollaston dealt with this question of knowledge be-
cause of an objection of an epistemological character that
had been oﬂ'ered against his ethical system. He says that
“an objection made oblige me in the next place to say some-
thing concerning the means of knowing, what is true; whether
there are any, that are sure, and which one may safely rely
upon. For if there be not, all that I have written is to no
purpose.” In addition to knowledge of particulars, an intel-
ligent being must have abstract and universal knowledge;
“this must be true if there be any such thing as a rational
being.” That this is the pre-condition of rationality, he
thinks to be an all-sufﬁcient proof. This is the argument
from efﬁcient cause, namely, that there must be a rational
world ground or else there could be no rational creatures
in the world, but there are rational creatures in the world
so there must be a rational world ground.1 Wollaston says
that “the knowledge of a particular idea is only the particu—
lar knowledge of that idea or thing; there it ends. But
reason is something universal, a kind of general instrument,
applicable to particular things and cases as they occur.”
We have, he says, ideas of a logical, metaphysical and
mathematical nature which are not limited to particular
things, but ideas which “comprehend whole classes and kinds.
And it is by the help of these that we reason. . . . If a
proposition be true, it is always so in all the instances and

1 Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delin., p. 41.

208

 

The Epistemology of Wollaston 209

uses to which it is applicable, for otherwise it must be both
true and false.” 2

Wollaston next proceeds to show how absolutely essential
correct knowledge is to a correct understanding of what
man’s duty is. The relation of ethics and epistemology is
necessarily very close when ethics is conceived objectively,
namely, when duty is determined by the real nature and re-
lations of things. This is true because one can have no
idea of one’s duty without a clear knowledge of things and
relations. This relation would be quite otherwise in the
systems of ethics which found the moral criterion not on
truth but on intuition, moral sense or feeling, because in
those systems the general problem of knowledge is irrelevant
since morality is based on a special kind of knowledge. But
Wollaston clearly realizes that if truth is to be taken to be
the criterion of morality and if truth is to be conceived as the
conformity of thoughts to the real nature of things in the
objective world, then is a clear understanding of the entire
process of knowing important for ethics. He says that the
faculty of reason is the moral faculty also, and that the
knowledge of what is moral is dependent upon what is real.
“That power which any intelligent being has of surveying
his own ideas and of comparing them, of forming to him-
self out of those that are immediate and abstract such gen-
eral and fundamental truths as he can be sure of, and of
making such inferences and conclusions as are agreeable to
them, in order to ﬁnd out more truth, resolve some question
or determine what is ﬁt to be done upon occasion, is what I
mean by the faculty of reason.” Most people, he says, both
think and live in a hand-to-mouth fashion, because “the gen-
erality of people are so little under the dominion of reason,”
guided only by conventional ideas and their own passions.8

In his epistemology Wollaston seeks to effect a reconcilia-
tion of empiricism and rationalism. I have taken the posi-
tion throughout this paper that Wollaston is not to be clas-
siﬁed as an intuitionist in morals nor as an intuitionalist in
knowledge. The proof of my position is established sufﬁ-

‘Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. -Delin., pp. 45-6.
' Ibid., pp. 45—6.

 

210 The Ethics of William Wollaston

ciently by the one fact that, from ﬁrst to last, Wollaston
bases morality upon the nature of things. No one, cer—
tainly, would take the position that one could have intui-
tional knowledge of the objective world, so if morality is to
an extent determined by the nature of things it is to that
extent dependent upon empirical knowledge for no other
kind of knowledge can be had of the world of things. Ratio-
cination is also necessary in most cases to determine one’s
relations and one’s duty in view of all the circumstances.
As I have already said, Wollaston was perhaps more in-
ﬂuenced by Locke’s epistemology than by any other inﬂuence,
and he agreed with Locke that there are no innate ideas of
any kind. He did not, however, believe the mind to be en-
tirely passive in knowledge, but rather took the position that
knowledge is an organization of the experiences presented
by the senses. “There is such a thing as right reason.
. . . To prove there is no such thing as right reason by any
good argument, is indeed impossible; because that would be
to show there is such a thing, by the manner of proving that
there is not.” Wollaston says that we have immediate and
abstract ideas and that the relations of these are “ade-
quately known by the mind,” but he also says that “these
are notiﬁed to us by the help of our senses.” He says, fur-
ther, that “more truth particularly of the kind, which is
most useful to us in our conduct here, is discoverable by this
method.” 4 I do not understand him to say that there are
innate ideas of morality or other innate ideas, but only that
there is a rational factor in knowledge, and as much in moral
knowledge as in any other. He clearly believes, with Locke,
that everything in the understanding came in through the
senses, but he just as surely believes in a rational synthetic
active mind as a factor in knowledge.‘5 It is this that enables
one to orientate himself in any life situation and to decide
just what ought to be done. So Wollaston teaches that
there are both sensory and rational factors in knowledge
and so in morality. It may be asked, if this be true, why
has Wollaston so frequently been classed with the intu-

‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., pp. 48—9.
' Locke, Essay on the Human Understanding, bk. 1, ch. 2.

 

The Epistemology of Wollaston 211

itionists? I think that a good deal of this misinterpretation
is due to the fact that this section of his book is not at all
well known. Many of those who characterize his system as
Intuitionism show no evidence of having read this section
giving his theory of knowledge, which is published only in'
his complete work, a very rare book. Naturally the prob-
lem of knowledge is treated only incidentally in the other
sections.

Wollaston then makes the ethical application of his episte-
mology: “To act according to right reason, and to act ac-
cording .to truth are in effect the same. . . . To be gov-
erned by reason is the general law imposed by the Author
of Nature upon them, whose uppermost faculty is reason;
as the dictates of it in particular cases are the particular
laws, to which they are subject.” 6 Here, as plainly as any-
where, Wollaston gives his idea of what conscience is. It
is a man’s judgment as to just what he, in particular, ought
to do, under the particular circumstances. He makes it
evident that this is his view as he goesbon to say: “It is
plain, that reason is of a commanding nature; it enjoins
this, condemns that, only allows some other things, and will
be paramount if it is at all. Now a being, who has such a
determining and governing power so placed in his nature, as
to be essential to him, is a being certainly framed to‘ be
governed by that power. It seems to me as much designed
by nature or rather the Author of Nature, that rational
animals should use their reason, and steer by it; as it is by
the shipwright, that the pilot should direct the vessel by the
use of the rudder he has ﬁtted to it. The rudder would not
be there, if it were not to be used; nor would reason be im-
planted in any nature only to be not cultivated and neg-
lected. And it is certain, it cannot be used, but it must
command; such is its nature. It is not in one’s power de-
liberately to resolve not to be governed by reason.” For,
he argues, it is contradictory to reason that one will not
be governed by reason and equally so for a rational being
not to reason why he acts. The fact that one is to steer
by the reason by no means implies that experience is unnec-

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 50.

 

212 The Ethics of William Wollaston

essary; in fact, no ﬁgure could better represent the function
and necessity of the two factors in knowledge and in morals
than that of the pilot.7 Wollaston thinks that one can
steer clear of all dangers by the right use of reason, so he
says that, “If a rational being, as such, is under obligation
to obey reason, and this obedience, or practice of reason,
coincides with the observation of truth,” it follows that
Natural Religion is true.8

It is not true, as some critics of Wollaston accuse, that
he identiﬁes intellectual error and immorality, for he insists
that immorality as truly as morality implies the truth of
the relations, and it could not be immorality otherwise.9 It
is true that he emphasizes proper education and thinks that
a good deal of the evils of the world could be remedied by
education. “The generality of people,” he says, “are not
sufﬁciently prepared by a proper education, to ﬁnd truth
by reasoning. And of them who have. liberal education, some
are soon immersed and lost in pleasures, or at least in fash-
ionable methods of living, rolling from one .visit or company
to another, and ﬂying from nothing so much as from them-
selves and the quiet retreat proper for meditation; others
become involved in business and the intricate aﬂ'airs of
life.” 10

Dugald Stewart says that Wollaston tried to reconcile
Locke’s theory of the-origin of our ideas with the immuta-
bility of moral distinctions by taking the position that vir—
tue consists in conduct conformable to truth. He says that
Wollaston insisted that right and wrong cannot be just
simple ideas, but that morality consists of actions conform—
able with relations perceived by the reason.11 If Stewart is
right, and I think that he is, Wollaston agreed with Locke
that there are no innate ideas either of morality or any
other kind. Right and wrong are not original notions, but
are products of experience and ratiocination. There are

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Delin., p. 51.
' Ibid., p. 52.

’ Ibid., p. 8.

1' Ibid., p. 61.

1‘ D. Stewart, Works, vol. VI, p. 290.

 

The Epistemology of Wollaston 213

two factors in knowledge, thinks Wollaston, an empirical
and a rational, and he thinks of them as having just about
the same relation to each other as Kant afterwards gave
them. He would not deny that all knowledge comes from
experience, but he does insist upon the importance of the
rational factor. In Wollaston’s thought it is not just empty
formal reason that constitutes the criterion of morality,
and here he differs essentially from Kant who made morality
to rest on an intuition due to the impingement of an infal-
lible conscience. Kant made the moral law autonomous,
resting neither upon experience, nor upon deductions of the
speculative reason; but upon the revelation of immediate
consciousness}2

Wollaston would not, however, go quite as far as Locke
does in the empirical direction. Locke’s position is that our
rules of morality, so far from being innate ideas are just
the practical regulations that experience has demonstrated
to be best. Wollaston would not say with Locke that the
truth and reasonableness of the Golden Rule need to be
demonstrated but would say that intelligence would assent
to it as an unquestionable truth.13 I think that Wundt is
right in saying that Wollaston’s ethics follows logically
from the epistemology of Locke. “As truth consists in
the agreement of our ideas with the nature of things, so the
good consists in the agreement of our acts with things.” 1“
To act according to the nature of things is to act morally ‘
and in obedience to God. So in order to act morally, ac-
cording to Wundt’s interpretation of Wollaston, one must
ﬁrst discover the nature of things and his relation thereto,
then what one’s duty is begins to become evident.“5 When
it is said that Wollaston makes reason the moral faculty,
it must, then, be remembered that it is the ordinary reason
that is meant and that the reason determines what is right

1’ Kant, Grundlegung zur Meta. der Sitten, Werke, III, 44..

1‘ Locke, Human Understanding, pp. 26—8.

1‘ “Wie das wahre in der Uebereinstimmung unserer Vorstellungen mit
der Natur der Dinge bestehe, so das Gute in der Ueberinstimmung

unserer Handlungen mit den Dingen.”
“ Wundt, Ethik, p. 393.

 

214 The Ethics of William Wollaston

and wrong as it determines true and false, namely, by ascer-
taining the facts and passing judgment upon the situation.16

Noack says that Wollaston agreed with Locke epistemo-
logically with regard to the matter of innate ideas. He says
that Wollaston also “denies with Locke all innate practical
principles (alle angeboren praktischen Grundsatze), and
ﬁnds the great principle of natural religion in that every
intelligent, active and free being should act so that he does
not contradict any truth with his action or that he may
treat everything as such as it is.” 17 Williams goes so far
as to say that this view of ethics is a more logical conse-
quence of Locke’s epistemology than is Locke’s own ethics.
This he says is true in spite of the fact that these moralists
are generally supposed to hold the very different theory of
Intuitionism.13 Practically this same position is taken in
the anonymous article in Francke’s Dictionary of Philosophy
and Science. It is stated “that Wollaston must be ranked
among those philosophers who base morality on reason and
not feeling . . . or on interest.” This distinguishes Wol-
laston’s position both from that of Hedonism and that of
Intuitionism, with which systems he has often been errone-
ously connected. The article is very careful to state that
his position is rationalistic but not intuitionalistic. It says
that “the majority of the Rationalistic School consider the
idea of good as a supreme principle, absolutely simple and
irreducible, divine type placed by God in our intelligence.” 19
The article goes on to say that Wollaston takes quite a dif-
ferent position. He tried to state the criterion of morality
in intellectual terms: “To act conformany with. truth is
to act well (Agir conformémant 6. la verité, c’est bien
A .9, 20

Maurice says that Wollaston wrote his book before
Locke’s Essay had gained any great authority, but that
“he participated in many of the feelings that gave birth to
it.” He regarded “truth as the foundation” of man’s na

1‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 51. ‘
1' Noack, Phil. Gesch. Lexion, p. 931.

1‘Williams, Art. Ethics, Brit.

1’ Francke, Diet. Des Sciences Philosophiques, p. 1728.

” Ibid., p. 1729.

 

 

The Epistemology of Wollaston 215

ture, Maurice says, and also took the position that “to be
true is to be happy.” Maurice says that Locke had been
compelled by his epistemology to say that things are good
or bad “only in reference to pleasure or pain.” 21 Maurice
says that: “If we must begin from the senses, if all knowl-
edge of what man thika and-is must be derived from im-
pressions on the senses, or from reﬂections on these impres-
sions, the sensations of pleasure and pain must be regarded
as the ultimate ground of good and evil.” 22 It is possible
to be empirical in method and arrive at an ethical philosophy
other than Hedonism, thinks Maurice, only by giving due
consideration to what is implied by “reﬂections on these im-
pressions” as a factor in knowledge, but this is precisely what
is meant by rationalism. Of course you cannot discover the
true nature of things without actual sense data, but this
data will be meaningless without organization. An objective
system of ethics must start with the nature of things and
this can be discovered only empirically, but moral as well as
intellectual orientation necessitates a synthesis of experi-
ence.

Smale, in his critical treatment of the abstract rational-
ism of Cudworth, shows the way that Wollaston relates the
two factors in knowledge. He says that there can be no
knowledge that is purely sense knowledge because the senses
give only the individual, the material and the accidental,
while knowledge is occupied with the universal, the abstract
and the essential. Sense, as such, “is a mere consciousness
of the impression, without the slightest reference to truth
or falsehood; but it is with truth and falsehood that knowl-
edge has to do. Sense but gives to the mind the cue fpr
action and hints to the understanding.” 23 Sense, Smale
says, can only give a never-ending ﬂux, each part of which
is individual and unconnected with any other. Knowledge
is dependent upon sense, but it is equally dependent upon
the rational factor. Cudworth is right, thinks Smale, in
holding that “the reason is the divine governor of man’s

“ Maurice, Moral and Metaphysical Phil., vol. II, p. 454.
" Ibid., p. 446.

" Smale, Sense and Reason in Cudworth, With Especial Reference to
the Ethical Implications, pp. 10-11.

 

216 The Ethics of William Wollaston

life, the very voice of God,” if he means by the reason “the
organized activity of the intelligible ideas.” In this sense,
Smale says, the reason can be regarded as the basis of
morality; for “as the relations of space and number have
objective reality cognizable by the reason; so also have
the distinctions of good and evil.” 2‘ In this sense Wol-
laston regards the reason as the moral faculty. Cudworth
had a very different conception of the reason’s way of gov—
erning life. He thought that the guidance of the reason
is due to certain innate ideas of good and evil which the
mind has prior to all experience.

Robert Blakey thinks that Wollaston held a view like
Cudworth’s. He takes a rather interesting position in his
interpretation of Wollaston, saying that “his ethical specu-
lations rested upon a system of metaphysical knowledge that
might be classiﬁed as the epistemOIOgy of common sense”
based on a “metaphysical dualism.25 I would be disposed
to agree that this is, so far, a fair characterization of his
philosophy. He does not stop here, nor does he interpret
Wollaston’s theory of moral knowledge at all realistically as
he has led one to expect. Instead he says that Wollaston
taught that the mind is “a real spiritual entity” and that
“it has innate powers of reﬂection, and notions of right and
wrong, good and evil, irrespective of the inﬂuence of the
senses, or the conventional rules of society.” While he says
that “Wollaston’s ethics is grounded on a simple metaphysi-
cal principle that truth in everything is to be in conformity
with the constituted order of nature . . . and that every-
thing in the world is regulated by inﬁnite wisdom,” he thinks
that Wollaston’s ethics is that of Intuitignism. He inter-
prets Wollaston this way and then goes right on and says
that he taught that “every act of a rational being, must be
the act of one capable of distinguishing and choosing by
the powers of its own will.” 2"

Erdmann says that Wollaston’s system of ethics rests
upon an empirical epistemology. He characterizes his

" Smale, Sense and Reason in Cudworth, etc., pp. 11—14.
'5 Blakey, His. of Phil., vol. III, 1 and 3.
'° Ibid., 7—8.

 

The Epistemology of Wollaston 217

standard of morality as objective, saying that his criterion
is based neither upon an innate idea of virtue nor upon an
inner impulse of feeling of oughtness, but upon the real ob-
jective nature of things. Now this objective nature of things
can be known only by experience, consequently objective
ethics must start with experience. I do not understand
Erdmann to deny that Wollaston believed in a general pre-
established harmony or general rationality throughout the
universe, but only to insist that the individual mind is de-
pendent upon experience for its knowledge of the world
beyond itself, and that things cannot be treated as they are
unless we know what they are. It is, we may say, an a
' priori principle, with Wollaston, that things should be
treated as they are; but what they are is something that
must be ascertained by experience. “If,” says Erdmann,
“the essential of this doctrine is that the nature of things
determines action and that the same is conditioned by the
knowledge of the things, the theoretical question how we
know the things and their relations is of the greatest im-
portance for ethics from this point of view.” For this rea-
son, he says, Wollaston raises the epistemological ques-
tion. “Now when he does not answer the question to the
effect that knowledge comes from experience, but rather
that it is based on certain abstract ideas whose relations
are directly certain to us and give the contents to the uni-
versally true propositions whose application particular
true propositions are; this seems to speak against the view
that Wollaston is an empiricist.” Nevertheless, says Erd-
mann, that is his epistemology.27 Erdmann thinks that
Wollaston failed to think himself through, so that there is
no complete agreement between his attitude toward the theo-
retical question of knowledge and his attitude toward moral
knowledge. “In the moral realm he has not arrived at a
pure empiricism,” but he rather “oscillates,” thinks Erd-
mann; “Sometimes he insists on the certainty of reason, on
ratiocination (der Sicherheit der Vernunft-Erkenntniss),
and seems to greatly prefer it to sense perception or empiri-
cal knowledge; because the sense organs are defective he
" Erdmann, Geschichte der neuen Phil., vol. II, p. 119.

 

218 The Ethics of William Woﬂastou

regards knowledge that is dependent upon sense data as
unreliable; then again he admits that ratiocination has as
its beginning sense perception (dass die Vernunft-Erkennt-
niss zu ihrem Anfange allerdinges die simliche Erkenntniss
habe); but ﬁnally he speaks again entirely in the sense of
empiricism when he asserts emphatically, that the mind has
not so deﬁnite a conception of itself as of objects.” Erd-
mann says that Wollaston stands on the threshold which
leads to a more advanced view of ethics than that of either
Intuitionism or Hedonism “which, with an empirical basis
is inevitable (welche bei empirischer Grundlage nicht
ausbleiben kann), namely, Eudzemonism.” Erdmann very
properly mentions the two sides of Wollaston’s epistemology,
but instead of saying that he oscillates from empiricism to
rationalism, I think that it would be more correct to say,
that he endeavors to synthesize the two and to show that
they are both essential to knowledge. In his other work
Erdmann says that Wollaston makes the essence of knowl-
edge lie in reason, and at the same time believes that all
knowledge comes through the senses.29 I see no inconsistency
in such a position, for it is just the belief that there is both
a rational and an empirical factor in knowledge.30

'Erdmann, Gesch. der neuen Phil., vol. II, pp. 119-190.
" Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Delt, pp. 45-6.

 

THE PROBLEM OF FREEDOM

SECTION IV

“or THE OBLIGATIONS or IMPEEFECT BEINGS WITH RESPECT To
THEIE POWER. or ACTING”

In this section Wollaston meets some objections as to
man’s freedom: “The question was this, If a man can ﬁnd
out truth, may he not want the power of acting agreeably
to it ?” He argues at length and in a familiar way that with-
out freedom there can be no moral obligation; “no being is
capable of any obligation to do that, which it has not power
or opportunity to do.” Without freedom a person, says
Wollaston, is in respect to anything “a being utterly unac-
tive, no agent at all, and therefore as to that act nothing
at all.” 1 Wollaston’s position in this section is practically
the same as in his introduction to the section on the true and
good, namely, that freedom is the precondition of morality.
“The imputations of moral good and evil to beings capable
of understanding and acting must be in proportion to. their
endeavor; or, their obligations reach, as far as their en-
deavors may.” He, in effect, says, that, we cannot say ought
except where we can say can. “They who are capable of
discerning truth” and of “acting conformany to it are
morally obliged to do it, as far as they are able; or, it is
the duty of such a being sincerely to endeavor to practice
reason; not to contradict any truth, by word or deed; and
in short, to treat everything as being what it is.” 2

Wollaston treats the question rather more in a practical
than in a theoretical way. He exhorts rational beings to
live in conformity to reason: “This is the sum of their re-

‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., pp. 62 and 7.
‘ Ibid., p. 68.

219

 

220 The Ethics of William Wollaston

ligion, from which no exemption or excuse lies.” This does
not mean, of course, that Wollaston identiﬁed religion and
ordinary morality, for a life in conformity to truth implies
a life in conformity to all truth, divine as well as human.
The question of freedom is one which each person can answer
for himself, Wollaston thinks, by trying to do what he
thinks he ought to do. “I am persuaded, if men would be
serious, and put forth themselves, they would ﬁnd by experi-
ence, that their wills are not so universally and peremp-
torily determined by what occurs, nor predestination and fate
so rigid but that much is left to their own conduct. Up
and try.” 3 Wollaston says that “at least a man can for-
bear to do that which contradicts truth, even though he
may not be able always to avoid contradictions of truths
because of omissions.” No man, he says, is morally obliged
to do the impossible, and “to oblige a man to do what he is
not free to do is like commanding a man to do something
with his third hand.” ‘

Perhaps the main reason why Wollaston said so little
on the subject of freedom was the fact that Clarke had
treated the subject so extensively and from the same point
of view. While Clarke emphasized the moral argument, to
which Wollaston conﬁned himself almost exclusively, he also
offered other arguments of a more theoretical nature. He
says that it is the very nature of man to be free. The soul
is “a permanent, indivisible, immaterial substance,” which
has certain powers, namely, thinking, feeling and willing.
Will is the power of the soul to act, and volition is the actual
exercise of this power.‘5 “Man either has within himself a
principle of action, a self-moving faculty, or he has not.”
If he has such a principle he is free, if otherwise, he is not
free but necessitated by causes without himself. A free
being is “one that is endued with a power of acting, as well
as of being acted upon.” 6 The soul of man is such a free
being and so every man “has entirely within himself a free

' Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., pp. 63—4.
‘Ibid., p. 62.

' Clarke, Letters to Dodel, 176 and 197.

' Clarke, Remarks, p. 15.

 

The Problem of Freedom 221

principle or power of determining his own action.” 7 “ ’Tis
the man that freely determines himself to act.” 8 The soul
has both passive and active powers. In perception, feeling
and judgment the mind is passive; in volition the mind is
active. The mind cannot avoid giving its assent to reasg_n—
able demonstrations. The passive states of the soul are
necessary, says Clarke, for they belong to the great system
of natural causes and effects which follow necessarily from
the nature of things and the laws of the universe.9 It was
objected, if the soul passive with its reasons, motives and
judgments be but a part of the necessary order of things,
does not the soul active belong to the same chain of causes
and effects? Clarke says not, because no matter what the
reasons, feelings and motives, the soul has the power of act-
ing from within itself. “Nothing that is passive can pos-
sibly be the cause of anything that is active. Understand-
ing, or judgment, or assent, or approbation, can no more
possibly be the efﬁcient cause of action than rest can be
the cause of motion.” The reason or motive, says Clarke, is
not the cause but only the occasion of action.10 No matter
how strong the motive this power still remains. A man can
act from a strong or from a weak motive, or from no motive
at all, or he may act even contrary to the very strongest
of motives.“ There can be no moral agency without free-
dom, so he agrees with Wollaston that freedom is the pre-
condition of morality. His statement is almost verbally
the same as Wollaston’s; whatever acts necessarily, does
not indeed act at all, but is only acted upon.” 12 If there
be no freedom there is no such thing as morality in human
lives but only an irresponsible succession of natural phe-
nomena destitute of all moral quality whatsoever. Wollas-
ton says, in this connection, that “that which has not the
opportunity or liberty of choosing for itself, and acting
accordingly, from an internal principle, acts, if it acts at
'Clarke, Nat. Reli., p. 121.

'Clarke, Remarks, p. 11.

’Leibniz and Clarke Correspondence, p. 289. Letters, p. 405.
‘° Clarke, Remarks, pp. 9-11.

nLeibniz and Clarke, pp. 121 and 413.

1'Ibid., pp. 413-4.

 

222 The Ethics of William Wollaston

all, under a necessity incumbent ab extra. But that, which
acts thus, is in reality only an instrument in the hand of
something which imposes the necessity; and cannot prop-
erly be said to act, but to be acted on. . . . A being under
the above-mentioned inabilities is, as to the morality of its
acts, in the state of inert and passive matter, and can be
but a machine to which no language or philosophy ever as-
cribed more.” 1‘

Erdmann is one of the few critics of Wollaston who give
evidence of having carefully considered this section. After
saying that Wollaston “oscillates” in his epistemology from
empiricism to rationalism, he proceeds to say that “In his
view of the practical this oscillation does not show itself,
action being always determined by the nature of things (im-
mer ist dass Handeln durch die Beschaﬁ'enheit der Dinge
bestimmit).” He says that Wollaston next grapples with
the question as to whether a man is free to act according
to the nature of things after he has attained anlunderstand-
ing of them. . Erdmann says that Wollaston “recognizes
that without this ability man can be under no moral obli-
gation,” but he calls attention to the fact that Wollaston
gave only empirical argument. Erdmann is of the opinion
that this practical belief in freedom is no proof of its truth.
“The inclinations determine man and by letting himself be
determined by them he acts well,” this is what Erdmann be-
lieves to be the conclusion to which Wollaston’s idea of treat-
ing everything as what it is really comes. He says that “such
autonomy as is due a person when it has to realize an ideal
set up by himself . . . Wollaston has not granted him.”
Erdmann thinks that “the good act has not been fully de-
ﬁned” by Wollaston; that “much is still left to the spon-
taneity of the subject. The decision, namely, to act or not
to act according to the nature of things,—only that deci-
sion remains to him, the question of what to do is decided
by nature.” Erdmann seems to think that ‘by bringing in
the wish for happiness and by identifying truth and happi—
ness Wollaston really rules out freedom as a factor in the
moral life, because one’s inclination really determines one

uWollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 7.

 

The Problem of Freedom 223

toward a true and a happy life. The only freedom remain-
ing to man is the freedom to act or not to act according to
the nature of things. There is no freedom as to the con-
tent of morality, for that is decided by nature.“ '

Burnet tries to convict Wollaston of determinism for a
reason very similar to that of Erdmann’s. He says that
Wollaston took the position that the desire of public happi-
ness is a reasonable ethical end because it is best that all
should be happy. That it is best that all should be happy
is necessarily perceivable by all rational natures. But if
men are so constituted by nature, asks Burnet, would that
not mean that there is no such thing as morality.“5 Burnet’s
criticism fails to consider the great difference between
things being necessarily perceivable, a merely intellectual
matter, and morality, which is a practical matter. Wollaston
does not say that one must act conformany to one’s intel-
lectual judgments.

Irons endeavors to show Wollaston to be a determinist
in connection with his exposition of the passage: “Design-
edly to treat things as being what they are not is the greatest
possible absurdity. It is to put bitter for sweet, darkness
for light, crooked for straight, etc. It is to subvert all
science, to renounce all sense of truth, and ﬂatly to deny
the existence. For nothing can be true, nothing does exist,
if things are not what they are.” 1" Irons says that: “In
these circumstances it is somewhat comforting to learn that
it is not in one’s power deliberately to resolve ‘not to be
governed by reason, for if a person could do this he must
either have some reason for making that resolution or none.
If he has none it is a resolution that stands upon no founda-
tion; and if he has some reason for it he is governed by
reason. This demonstrates that reason must govern.” 1"
Irons draws a conclusion that Wollaston guards against,
namely, that the will is as eqpally determined as the intel-
lect. We give our assent tq demonstrated truth, says Wol-

“ Erdmann, Geschichte der neuen Phil., vol. II, pp. 190-99.

" Gilbert Burnet, Art. in London Journal, p. 214.

1“Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 15.

” Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Review, vol. 19, p. 138.

 

224 ' The E thics of William 170th

laston, because as rational beings we cannot possibly do
otherwise. There is no choice in matters of this kind, for
an intellectual being cannot possibly believe anything which
he perceives to be self-contradictory.18 Wollaston does not
argue from this that moral actions are equally determined,
but insists that man is free to act or not to act conform-
ably with truth and the nature of things. Irons, though,
argues that: “If right action and correct thinking stand on
the same basis, it is clear that a wrong action is an utter
impossibility.” Yes, of course, but Wollaston is very care—
ful to state that they do not stand on the same basis. He
says that morality is as true as an intellectually true propo-
sition, and that immorality is as false as an intellectually
false~ pr0position; but he does not place them on the same
foundation because the one kind of relation belongs to the
realm of determinism, the other to the realm of f reedom."
Clarke has a very clear statement of this diﬂ'erence: “Assent
to a plain speculative truth is not in a man’s power to with-
hold; but to act according to the plain right and reason
of things, this he may, by the natural liberty of his will
f orbear.”<""0 But Irons, after considering this passage, still
insists that freedom cannot explain why the impossible is
actual. His argument is as follows: to do wrong is the
same as to believe the self-contradictory, which cannot be
done. Consequently to do wrong is impossible, and not
even the freedom of the will can explain it. Wollaston,
in truth, says that to do wrong is to act in a self-contradic-
tory way; that immorality is as absurd and inconsistent as
the denial of self-evident truth. Irons proceeds to show that
morality is impossible from this point of view, because “if
reason is the motive power which lies behind right conduct,
the individual who obeys the moral law acts under the com-
pulsion of his rational nature. There is then no difference
between moral obligation and rational necessity. An action
is not moral, however, if it is performed under compulsion
of any kind. Consequently, if the rationalistic view of con-

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Dcli., p. 9.
" Ibid., pp. 7 and 69.
" Clarke, Nat. Reli., pp. 64-5.

 

The Problem of Freedom 225

duct be adopted, right action can have no moral value or
signiﬁcance.” 21 Wollaston, however, as we have seen, in-
sists that compulsionbelongs only to existential judgments,
to the reaction of the intellect to .matters of fact, not to
moral actions. Intellectual beings must assent to the truth‘
of the proposition A is A, but a moral being may act as if.
A were not A.22

Wollaston’s rationalistic theory of morals, Leslie Ste-
phen thinks to be but an application to ethical specu-
lation of the Cartesian metaphysics. According to this
metaphysics, says Stephen, the nature of everything is as
God has constituted it, consequently there can be nothing
really independent or external to God. Wollaston’s ethics,
it is contended, really leads to the spiritual determinism of
Spinoza and Calvin. God is the ﬁrst and the sustaining
cause of all things. Since “He moves the stars and directs
the course of a bubble,” all natures and relations are de-
termined; the moral as the physical laws belong to the nature
of things as He has constituted them.23 It might be an-
swered that if law means the same thing when we speak of
moral as when we speak of natural laws, there can be no
such thing as morality because, on that assumption, we
would be forced to admit that whatever is is right, and
that morality is mere conformity to nature. Wollaston does
not identify the natural and the moral,,but differentiates the
one from the other on the ground that intellectual relations
are determined, while moral relations are free.24 It is true
that Wollaston says that morality is like truth in one re-
spect, namely, that coherency is the norm for both. He
says that both immorality and self-contradictory intellec-
tual propositions are absurd, but there is this difference
between them, the one is possible, the other impossible.”5

While assent is necessitated, it is also true that the doc-
trine of necessity assails the truthworthiness of knowledge.
This is true, because in a world where all is necessitated one

” Irons, Rationalism in Modern Ethics, Phil. Review., vol. 12, p. 149.
I'Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 8.

" Leslie Stephen, Eng. Thought in the 18th Cen., vol. 2, pp. 4-5.
“Wollaston, Bell. of Nat. Deli., pp. 8, 42 and 68.

" Ibid., See. I, Prop. II and III.

 

226 The Ethics of William Wollaston

event is just as conformable to the nature of things as an-
other. Only in a system which includes freedom is there any
tenable ground for the distinction between truth and error.
This is true because knowledge presupposes, a unitary psy—
chical agent capable of acting and not only of being acted
upon, for whatever may come from without there is knowl-
edge only as the mind reacts upon this sense data. The ac-
tivity of the mind is involved in the relating of the sense
impressions. There can be no knowledge withoutthis relat-
ing activity and only a free unitary psychical agent could
be conscious of identity in the midst of change.26

In his section relating to the Deity, Wollaston under-
takes the reconciliation of human freedom and divine provi-
dence. “It is not impossible,” he says, “that men, whose
natures and actions are foreknown, may be introduced into
the world in such times, places and other circumstances, as
their acts and behavior may not only coincide with the gen-
eral plan of things, but also answers many private cases
too.” He thinks that there may well be in the Divine mind
something like a projection of the future history of man-
kind and also a Divine guidance of men and at the same
time men be left to live their lives in freedom.” He insists
that whatever Divine plans there may be for the world and
for humanity, and he has a teleological conception of things,
must be ultimately reconcilable with human freedom.

A signiﬁcant thing in Wollaston’s ethics is that he clearly
realizes that morality gets its meaning from the relation of
each thing to every other in the universe. Morality, for
him, has its warrant and justiﬁcation in the ultimate mean-
ing of reality and every moral act has a signiﬁcance for
the whole of reality. If this be his metaphysics of morals
then we can expect it to become involved in all the difﬁculties
connected with every idealistic view of the world, particu-
larly the difﬁculties connected with the relation of the one
and the many. In a theistic view of the world, like that of
Wollaston, morality must be identiﬁed with the realization

" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., pp. 45 -6 and 7. Clarke, Nat. Reli.,
191, and Remarks, p. 15. .
" Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., pp. 104 «5.

 

The Problem of Freedom 227

' of the supreme spiritual principle. The universe cannot be
thought of as planless and purposeless but if we say that
there is an all-comprehending divine plan, a cosmic pur-
pose running through everything, what is left of the idea
of freedom and individuality? The individual’s moral life
as a whole is apparently but a part of the supreme purpose
of the universe, and each moral act but a part of the divine
plan. To be sure each moral act, on this assumption, has
a supreme worth; but the question Wollaston is concerned
with is this: is there any morality attaching to acts when
the moral life is regarded as but a part of the consum—
mation of a divine plan. Ethical'idealism must identify the
moral life with the realization of the supreme spiritual prin-
ciple; but this does not mean, Wollaston seems to think,
that we are to treat the‘contributionrof the moral individual
towards the fulﬁllment of the supreme purpose as merely an
expression, through him, of that principle. Wollaston thinks
that there is a supreme principle and a general plan of
things but that men are “left to live their lives in freedom.”
I think that Schiller’s words: '

“Nehmt die Glitter auf in euren Willen” .

well expresses Wollaston’s position. Wollaston and Clarke
both reacted rather strongly from the spiritual determinism
of Calvin and Leibniz and yet they clearly saw that there
must be a spiritual principle in the universe.

In every moral act there is a divine and a human aspect.
The ﬁrst relates it to the supreme purpose of the universe,
while the second gives it its individual character. Wollaston
seeks to ﬁnd the truth in both, but does not quite effect a
reconciliation except by faith. If the absolute identiﬁca-
tion of the ﬁnite wills with the inﬁnite is denied, how can
we believe that the supreme purpose will be realized, since
its realization is dependent upon the success or failure of
ﬁnite wills? We can so far as we are concerned, if freedom
is true, defeat the divine purpose, for it is contingent upon
our co-operation. There have been two ways of solving this
difﬁculty of the ﬁnite and the divine will. Some seem to
think that the ﬁnite moral life is but a medium through which

 

 

228 The Ethics of William Wollaston

the divine purpose realizes itself. So conceived, the indi-
vidual is just an instrument, a mere manifestation of the
absolute, differing from the manifestations in nature only
in self-onsciousness. Freedom, in this sense, consists in
doing what the divine requires of us and in acquiescence in
the divine plan. The. supreme principle cannot fail to real-
ize its purpose in the world no matter what part the ﬁnite
being plays or fails to play. The other extreme view is
that of the freedom of indifference. Wollaston seems to
have believed that there is a general plan for the world and
that our duty consists in conforming our lives to this plan.
He did not, I think, believe that creatures are necessary
beings, but only that the way to self-realization is through
free conformity to the divine plans.28

The objective method of ethics makes some very clear
implications as to the relations of the divine and the human
will, for if our criterion be that everything is to be treated
according to its nature, then it follows necessarily that
morality consists in living conformany to God’s plans.
Wollaston says that “the owning of things, in all our con-
duct, to be as they are, is direct obedience . . . to Him, who
is the Author of Nature :” 2“ Clarke says that the will of
God always determines itself to act according to the eternal
reason of things, and that all rational creatures are obliged,
if they would be rational and moral, to govern themselves in
all their actions by the same eternal rules of reason that
govern God. That this is not determinism but moral free-
dom is very evident from this quotation: “The same reason
of things, with regard to which the will of God always and
necessarily does determine itself to act in constant con-
formity to the eternal rules of justice, equity, goodness and
truth; ought also constantly to determine the wills of all
subordinate rational things, to govern all their actions by
the same rules. It is very unreasonable and blameworthy
in practice, that any intelligent creature endued with reason
and will, capable of distinguishing good from evil and of

’Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., pp. 7 and 164-5. Baillie, in Hastings

Ency. of Reli. and Ethics, vol. V, p. 410.
’Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 14.

 

The Problem of Freedom 5229

choosing the one and refusing the other, should wilfully and
perverser choose to act contrary to reason and nature.” 3°
The moral words “ought,” “should” and “choose” all occur
in this brief passage. And these words are found just as
frequently in Wollaston’s work. “By religion,” he says,
“I mean nothing else but an obligation to do what ought not
to be omitted, and to forbear what ought not to be done.”
This means, according to Wollaston, “That every intelli—
gent, active and free being should so behave himself, as by
no act to contradict truth; or, that he should treat every-
thing as being what it is.” 31

" Clarke, Nat. Belt, pp. 186-7.
“ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 24.

 

 

THE PROBLEMS OF EVIL AND IMMORTALITY

SECTION V

“'rau'rns RELATING TO THE nnrrr”

This is a long, interesting section but only a small part
of it is of any particular interest to us. His discussion of
the problems of evil and immortality is all that bears on
our question. He takes up the problem of evil by saying
that the conception of the Deity as unitary precludes the
existence of an independent principle of evil. As to moral
good and evil, “they seem,” he says, “to depend upon our4
selves. If we do but endeavor, the most we can, to do what
we ought, we shall not be guilty of not doing it; and there-
fore it is not our fault, and not to be charged upon any
other being, if guilt and evil be introduced by our neglect,
or abuse of our liberty.” 1 His solution of the problem of
moral evil is rather more practical than theoretical. As to
physical evil he suggests as an explanation our ﬁnitude or
narrow point of view. “Some things seem to be evil, which
would not appear to be such, if we could see through the
whole contexture of things.” And if there is a future state,
that which seems to be evil now may be rectiﬁed or rather
shown to be good from the point of view of eternity. To
ask why God permits evil, he says, is the same as asking
why God created a material world inhabited by imperfect
beings.2 “If the virtuous man has undergone more in this
life, than it would be reasonable he should suffer, if there
was no other; yet those sufferings may not be unreasonable,
if there is another. For they may be made up to him by
such enjoyments, as it would be reasonable for him to

‘ Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli., p. 72.

1' Ibid., pp. 72-6.

230

 

The Probbms of Evil and Immortality 281

prefer, even with those present mortiﬁcations, before the
pleasures of this life with the loss of them. Sometimes the
only way to the felicities of a better state may lie through
dark and difﬁcult passes, discipline to some men being neces-
sary, to bring them to reﬂect, and to force them into such
methods as may produce in them proper improvements;
such, as otherwise and of ’ themselves they would never have
fallen into. On the other side, if vicious and wicked men
do prosper and make a ﬁgure,—-—yet it is possible their suf-
ferings hereafter may be such, as that the excess of them
above their past enjoyments may be equal to the just pay-
ment of their villainies and wickedness.” 3 This Wollaston
thinks argues for the necessity of the future state, “if good
and bad men are “not respectively treated according to rea-
son in this life, they may be yet so treated, if this and an-
other to follow be taken together into account.‘

The assumption back of all the thinking of Wollaston
is that the universe in which we live is inherently rational
and coherent. He thinks that this is the necessary implica-
tion of all thinking. An objective system of ethics is of
course built upon this assumption. “The foundation of re-
ligion lies in that difference between the acts of men, which
distinguishes them into good, evil, indifferent.” 5 These dis-
tinctions lie in the nature of things and so morality con-
sists in the “owning of things, in all our conduct, to be as
they are.” ° Wollaston believes in immortality on the ground
that “there must be a future life where proper amends may
be made,” where the wrongs of this world may be made right.
This belief in immortality, thinking could demand only if
the world is thought to be ultimately consistent and ra-
tional. If this life be all, Wollaston says, “the general and
usual state of mankind is scarce consistent with the idea
of a reasonable cause.” 7 He thinks that one could not
believe in a Supreme Being, at least in one who is rational,
without believing in the hereafter, because it would be inher-

‘Wollaston, Reli. of Nat. Deli” p. 118.
‘ Ibid., p. 114. .

'Ibid., p. 7.

‘ Ibid., p. 14.

’Ibid., p. 905.

 

282 The Ethics of William Wollastou ~

ently irrational for the good to suﬁer as they frequently
do in this life if there were no after life of blessedness. But
how can we be sure that God will reward virtue in the next
world more liberally than in this? In trying to answer this
question, he says, he “begins to be very sensible how much
he wants a guide.” He is not able to fall back on revela-
tion for “a guide” but still he feels sure that all is well. His
ground for this faith is that there must be “a reasonable
cause” to explain it all.8 ‘ .

'Wollaston, Bali. of Nat. Belt, pp. 118-4 and 911.

 

